BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC. 



To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.: 

Our gain in net worth during 2006 was $16.9 billion, which increased the per-share book value of 
both our Class A and Class B stock by 18.4%. Over the last 42 years (that is, since present management 
took over) book value has grown from $19 to $70,281, a rate of 21.4% compounded annually.* 

We believe that $16.9 billion is a record for a one-year gain in net worth - more than has ever 
been booked by any American business, leaving aside boosts that have occurred because of mergers (e.g., 
AOL's purchase of Time Warner). Of course, Exxon Mobil and other companies earn far more than 
Berkshire, but their earnings largely go to dividends and/or repurchases, rather than to building net worth. 

All that said, a confession about our 2006 gain is in order. Our most important business, 
insurance, benefited from a large dose of luck: Mother Nature, bless her heart, went on vacation. After 
hammering us with hurricanes in 2004 and 2005 - storms that caused us to lose a bundle on super-cat 
insurance - she just vanished. Last year, the red ink from this activity turned black - very black. 

In addition, the great majority of our 73 businesses did outstandingly well in 2006. Let me focus 
for a moment on one of our largest operations, GEICO. What management accomplished there was simply 
extraordinary. 

As I've told you before, Tony Nicely, GEICO' s CEO, went to work at the company 45 years ago, 
two months after turning 18. He became CEO in 1992, and from then on the company's growth exploded. 
In addition, Tony has delivered staggering productivity gains in recent years. Between yearend 2003 and 
yearend 2006, the number of GEICO policies increased from 5.7 million to 8.1 million, a jump of 42%. 
Yet during that same period, the company's employees (measured on a fulltime-equivalent basis) fell 3.5%. 
So productivity grew 47%. And GEICO didn't start fat. 

That remarkable gain has allowed GEICO to maintain its all-important position as a low-cost 
producer, even though it has dramatically increased advertising expenditures. Last year GEICO spent $631 
million on ads, up from $238 million in 2003 (and up from $31 million in 1995, when Berkshire took 
control). Today, GEICO spends far more on ads than any of its competitors, even those much larger. We 
will continue to raise the bar. 

Last year I told you that if you had a new son or grandson to be sure to name him Tony. But Don 
Keough, a Berkshire director, recently had a better idea. After reviewing GEICO's performance in 2006, 
he wrote me, "Forget births. Tell the shareholders to immediately change the names of their present 
children to Tony or Antoinette." Don signed his letter "Tony." 

Charlie Munger - my partner and Berkshire's vice chairman - and I run what has turned out to be 
a big business, one with 217,000 employees and annual revenues approaching $100 billion. We certainly 
didn't plan it that way. Charlie began as a lawyer, and I thought of myself as a security analyst. Sitting in 
those seats, we both grew skeptical about the ability of big entities of any type to function well. Size seems 
to make many organizations slow-thinking, resistant to change and smug. In Churchill's words: "We shape 
our buildings, and afterwards our buildings shape us." Here's a telling fact: Of the ten non-oil companies 
having the largest market capitalization in 1965 - titans such as General Motors, Sears, DuPont and 
Eastman Kodak - only one made the 2006 list. 



*A11 per-share figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares. Figures for the B shares 
are 1/30* of those shown for the A. 


3 


In fairness, we've seen plenty of successes as well, some truly outstanding. There are many giant- 
company managers whom I greatly admire; Ken Chenault of American Express, Jeff Immelt of G.E. and 
Dick Kovacevich of Wells Fargo come quickly to mind. But I don't think I could do the management job 
they do. And I know I wouldn't enjoy many of the duties that come with their positions - meetings, 
speeches, foreign travel, the charity circuit and governmental relations. For me, Ronald Reagan had it 
right: "It's probably true that hard work never killed anyone - but why take the chance?" 

So I've taken the easy route, just sitting back and working through great managers who run their 
own shows. My only tasks are to cheer them on, sculpt and harden our corporate culture, and make major 
capital-allocation decisions. Our managers have returned this trust by working hard and effectively. 

For their performance over the last 42 years - and particularly for 2006 - Charlie and I thank 

them. 

Yardsticks 

Charlie and I measure Berkshire's progress and evaluate its intrinsic value in a number of ways. 
No single criterion is effective in doing these jobs, and even an avalanche of statistics will not capture some 
factors that are important. For example, it's essential that we have managers much younger than I available 
to succeed me. Berkshire has never been in better shape in this regard - but I can't prove it to you with 
numbers. 

There are two statistics, however, that are of real importance. The first is the amount of 
investments (including cash and cash-equivalents) that we own on a per-share basis. Arriving at this figure, 
we exclude investments held in our finance operation because these are largely offset by borrowings. 
Here's the record since present management acquired control of Berkshire: 


Year Per-Share Investments * 

1965 $ 4 

1975 159 

1985 2,407 

1995 21,817 

2006 $80,636 

Compound Growth Rate 1965-2006 27.5% 

Compound Growth Rate 1995-2006 12.6% 


*Net of minority interests 

In our early years we put most of our retained earnings and insurance float into investments in 
marketable securities. Because of this emphasis, and because the securities we purchased generally did 
well, our growth rate in investments was for a long time quite high. 

Over the years, however, we have focused more and more on the acquisition of operating 
businesses. Using our funds for these purchases has both slowed our growth in investments and accelerated 
our gains in pre-tax earnings from non-insurance businesses, the second yardstick we use. Here's how 
those earnings have looked: 


4 


Year 


Pre-Tax Earnings Per Share * 


1965 $ 4 

1975 4 

1985 52 

1995 175 

2006 $3,625 

Compound Growth Rate 1965-2006 17.9% 

Compound Growth Rate 1995-2006 31.7% 


*Excluding purchase-accounting adjustments and net of minority interests 

Last year we had a good increase in non-insurance earnings - 38%. Large gains from here on in, 
though, will come only if we are able to make major, and sensible, acquisitions. That will not be easy. We 
do, however, have one advantage: More and more, Berkshire has become "the buyer of choice" for 
business owners and managers. Initially, we were viewed that way only in the U.S. (and more often than 
not by private companies). We've long wanted, nonetheless, to extend Berkshire's appeal beyond U.S. 
borders. And last year, our globe-trotting finally got underway. 

Acquisitions 

We began 2006 by completing the three acquisitions pending at yearend 2005, spending about $6 
billion for PacifiCorp, Business Wire and Applied Underwriters. All are performing very well. 

The highlight of the year, however, was our July 5 th acquisition of most of ISCAR, an Israeli 
company, and our new association with its chairman, Eitan Wertheimer, and CEO, Jacob Harpaz. The 
story here began on October 25, 2005, when I received a 114-page letter from Eitan, of whom I then knew 
nothing. The letter began, "I am writing to introduce you to ISCAR," and proceeded to describe a cutting- 
tool business carried on in 61 countries. Then Eitan wrote, "We have for some time considered the issues 
of generational transfer and ownership that are typical for large family enterprises, and have given much 
thought to ISCAR' s future. Our conclusion is that Berkshire Hathaway would be the ideal home for 
ISCAR. We believe that ISCAR would continue to thrive as a part of your portfolio of businesses." 

Overall, Eitan' s letter made the quality of the company and the character of its management leap 
off the page. It also made me want to learn more, and in November, Eitan, Jacob and ISCAR' s CFO, 
Danny Goldman, came to Omaha. A few hours with them convinced me that if we were to make a deal, we 
would be teaming up with extraordinarily talented managers who could be trusted to run the business after 
a sale with all of the energy and dedication that they had exhibited previously. However, having never 
bought a business based outside of the U.S. (though I had bought a number of foreign stocks), I needed to 
get educated on some tax and jurisdictional matters. With that task completed, Berkshire purchased 80% of 
ISCAR for $4 billion. The remaining 20% stays in the hands of the Wertheimer family, making it our 
valued partner. 

ISCAR' s products are small, consumable cutting tools that are used in conjunction with large and 
expensive machine tools. It's a business without magic except for that imparted by the people who run it. 
But Eitan, Jacob and their associates are true managerial magicians who constantly develop tools that make 
their customers' machines more productive. The result: ISCAR makes money because it enables its 
customers to make more money. There is no better recipe for continued success. 


5 


In September, Charlie and I, along with five Berkshire associates, visited ISCAR in Israel. We - 
and I mean every one of us - have never been more impressed with any operation. At ISCAR, as 
throughout Israel, brains and energy are ubiquitous. Berkshire shareholders are lucky to have joined with 
Eitan, Jacob, Danny and their talented associates. 

A few months later, Berkshire again became "the buyer of choice" in a deal brought to us by my 
friend, John Roach, of Fort Worth. John, many of you will remember, was Chairman of Justin Industries, 
which we bought in 2000. At that time John was helping John Justin, who was terminally ill, find a 
permanent home for his company. John Justin died soon after we bought Justin Industries, but it has since 
been run exactly as we promised him it would be. 

Visiting me in November, John Roach brought along Paul Andrews, Jr., owner of about 80% of 
TTI, a Fort Worth distributor of electronic components. Over a 35-year period, Paul built TTI from 
$112,000 of sales to $1.3 billion. He is a remarkable entrepreneur and operator. 

Paul, 64, loves running his business. But not long ago he happened to witness how disruptive the 
death of a founder can be both to a private company's employees and the owner's family. What starts out 
as disruptive, furthermore, often evolves into destructive. About a year ago, therefore, Paul began to think 
about selling TTI. His goal was to put his business in the hands of an owner he had carefully chosen, rather 
than allowing a trust officer or lawyer to conduct an auction after his death. 

Paul rejected the idea of a "strategic" buyer, knowing that in the pursuit of "synergies," an owner 
of that type would be apt to dismantle what he had so carefully built, a move that would uproot hundreds of 
his associates (and perhaps wound TTI's business in the process). He also ruled out a private equity firm, 
which would very likely load the company with debt and then flip it as soon as possible. 

That left Berkshire. Paul and I met on the morning of November 15 th and made a deal before 
lunch. Later he wrote me: "After our meeting, I am confident that Berkshire is the right owner for TTI . . . 
I am proud of our past and excited about our future." And so are Charlie and I. 

We also made some "tuck-in" acquisitions during 2006 at Fruit of the Loom ("Fruit"), MiTek, 
CTB, Shaw and Clayton. Fruit made the largest purchases. First, it bought Russell Corp., a leading 
producer of athletic apparel and uniforms for about $1.2 billion (including assumed debt) and in December 
it agreed to buy the intimate apparel business of VF Corp. Together, these acquisitions add about $2.2 
billion to Fruit's sales and bring with them about 23,000 employees. 

Charlie and I love it when we can acquire businesses that can be placed under managers, such as 
John Holland at Fruit, who have already shown their stuff at Berkshire. MiTek, for example, has made 14 
acquisitions since we purchased it in 2001, and Gene Toombs has delivered results from these deals far in 
excess of what he had predicted. In effect, we leverage the managerial talent already with us by these tuck- 
in deals. We will make many more. 

We continue, however, to need "elephants" in order for us to use Berkshire's flood of incoming 
cash. Charlie and I must therefore ignore the pursuit of mice and focus our acquisition efforts on much 
bigger game. 

Our exemplar is the older man who crashed his grocery cart into that of a much younger fellow 
while both were shopping. The elderly man explained apologetically that he had lost track of his wife and 
was preoccupied searching for her. His new acquaintance said that by coincidence his wife had also 
wandered off and suggested that it might be more efficient if they jointly looked for the two women. 
Agreeing, the older man asked his new companion what his wife looked like. "She's a gorgeous blonde," 
the fellow answered, "with a body that would cause a bishop to go through a stained glass window, and 
she's wearing tight white shorts. How about yours?" The senior citizen wasted no words: "Forget her, 
we'll look for yours." 


6 


What we are looking for is described on page 25. If you have an acquisition candidate that fits, 
call me - day or night. And then watch me shatter a stained glass window. 

Now, let's examine the four major operating sectors of Berkshire. Lumping their financial figures 
together impedes analysis. So we'll look at them as four separate businesses, starting with the all- 
important insurance group. 

Insurance 

Next month marks the 40 th anniversary of our entrance into the insurance business. It was on 
March 9, 1967, that Berkshire purchased National Indemnity and its companion company, National Fire & 
Marine, from Jack Ringwalt for $8.6 million. 

Jack was a long-time friend of mine and an excellent, but somewhat eccentric, businessman. For 
about ten minutes every year he would get the urge to sell his company. But those moods - perhaps 
brought on by a tiff with regulators or an unfavorable jury verdict - quickly vanished. 

In the mid-1960s, I asked investment banker Charlie Heider, a mutual friend of mine and Jack's, 
to alert me the next time Jack was "in heat." When Charlie's call came, I sped to meet Jack. We made a 
deal in a few minutes, with me waiving an audit, "due diligence" or anything else that would give Jack an 
opportunity to reconsider. We just shook hands, and that was that. 

When we were due to close the purchase at Charlie's office, Jack was late. Finally arriving, he 
explained that he had been driving around looking for a parking meter with some unexpired time. That was 
a magic moment for me. I knew then that Jack was going to be my kind of manager. 

When Berkshire purchased Jack's two insurers, they had "float" of $17 million. We've regularly 
offered a long explanation of float in earlier reports, which you can read on our website. Simply put, float 
is money we hold that is not ours but which we get to invest. 

At the end of 2006, our float had grown to $50.9 billion, and we have since written a huge 
retroactive reinsurance contract with Equitas - which I will describe in the next section - that boosts float 
by another $7 billion. Much of the gain we've made has come through our acquisition of other insurers, 
but we've also had outstanding internal growth, particularly at Ajit Jain's amazing reinsurance operation. 
Naturally, I had no notion in 1967 that our float would develop as it has. There's much to be said for just 
putting one foot in front of the other every day. 

The float from retroactive reinsurance contracts, of which we have many, automatically drifts 
down over time. Therefore, it will be difficult for us to increase float in the future unless we make new 
acquisitions in the insurance field. Whatever its size, however, the all-important cost of Berkshire's float 
over time is likely to be significantly below that of the industry, perhaps even falling to less than zero. 
Note the words "over time." There will be bad years periodically. You can be sure of that. 

In 2006, though, everything went right in insurance - really right. Our managers - Tony Nicely 
(GEICO), Ajit Jain (B-H Reinsurance), Joe Brandon and Tad Montross (General Re), Don Wurster 
(National Indemnity Primary), Tom Nerney (U.S. Liability), Tim Kenesey (Medical Protective), Rod 
Eldred (Homestate Companies and Cypress), Sid Ferenc and Steve Menzies (Applied Underwriters), John 
Kizer (Central States) and Don Towle (Kansas Bankers Surety) - simply shot the lights out. When I recite 
their names, I feel as if I'm at Cooperstown, reading from the Hall of Fame roster. Of course, the overall 
insurance industry also had a terrific year in 2006. But our managers delivered results generally superior to 
those of their competitors. 


7 


Below is the tally on our underwriting and float for each major sector of insurance. Enjoy the 
view, because you won't soon see another like it. 


(in $ millions) 


Underwriting Profit (Loss) 


Yearend Float 


Insurance Operations 2006 2005 

General Re $ 526 $( 334) 

B-H Reinsurance 1,658 (1,069) 

GEICO 1,314 1,221 

Other Primary 340 ** 235 * 

Total $3.838 $ 53 

* Includes MedPro from June 30, 2005. 
** Includes Applied Underwriters from May 19, 2006. 


$22,827 $22,920 

16,860 16,233 

7,171 6,692 

4,029 3,442 

$50.887 $49.287 


2006 2005 


In 2007, our results from the bread-and-butter lines of insurance will deteriorate, though I think 
they will remain satisfactory. The big unknown is super-cat insurance. Were the terrible hurricane seasons 
of 2004-05 aberrations? Or were they our planet's first warning that the climate of the 21 st Century will 
differ materially from what we've seen in the past? If the answer to the second question is yes, 2006 will 
soon be perceived as a misleading period of calm preceding a series of devastating storms. These could 
rock the insurance industry. It's naive to think of Katrina as anything close to a worst-case event. 

Neither Ajit Jain, who manages our super-cat operation, nor I know what lies ahead. We do know 
that it would be a huge mistake to bet that evolving atmospheric changes are benign in their implications 
for insurers. 

Don't think, however, that we have lost our taste for risk. We remain prepared to lose $6 billion 
in a single event, ifwe have been paid appropriately for assuming that risk. We are not willing, though, to 
take on even very small exposures at prices that don't reflect our evaluation of loss probabilities. 
Appropriate prices don't guarantee profits in any given year, but inappropriate prices most certainly 
guarantee eventual losses. Rates have recently fallen because a flood of capital has entered the super-cat 
field. We have therefore sharply reduced our wind exposures. Our behavior here parallels that which we 
employ in financial markets: Be fearful when others are greedy, and be greedy when others are fearful. 

Lloyd's, Equitas and Retroactive Reinsurance 

Last year - we are getting now to Equitas - Berkshire agreed to enter into a huge retroactive 
reinsurance contract, a policy that protects an insurer against losses that have already happened, but whose 
cost is not yet known. I'll give you details of the agreement shortly. But let's first take a journey through 
insurance history, following the route that led to our deal. 

Our tale begins around 1688, when Edward Lloyd opened a small coffee house in London. 
Though no Starbucks, his shop was destined to achieve worldwide fame because of the commercial 
activities of its clientele - shipowners, merchants and venturesome British capitalists. As these parties 
sipped Edward's brew, they began to write contracts transferring the risk of a disaster at sea from the 
owners of ships and their cargo to the capitalists, who wagered that a given voyage would be completed 
without incident. These capitalists eventually became known as "underwriters at Lloyd's." 

Though many people believe Lloyd's to be an insurance company, that is not the case. It is 
instead a place where many member-insurers transact business, just as they did centuries ago. 

Over time, the underwriters solicited passive investors to join in syndicates. Additionally, the 
business broadened beyond marine risks into every imaginable form of insurance, including exotic 
coverages that spread the fame of Lloyd's far and wide. The underwriters left the coffee house, found 
grander quarters and formalized some rules of association. And those persons who passively backed the 
underwriters became known as "names." 


8 


Eventually, the names came to include many thousands of people from around the world, who 
joined expecting to pick up some extra change without effort or serious risk. True, prospective names were 
always solemnly told that they would have unlimited and everlasting liability for the consequences of their 
syndicate's underwriting - "down to the last cufflink," as the quaint description went. But that warning 
came to be viewed as perfunctory. Three hundred years of retained cufflinks acted as a powerful sedative 
to the names poised to sign up. 

Then came asbestos. When its prospective costs were added to the tidal wave of environmental 
and product claims that surfaced in the 1980s, Lloyd's began to implode. Policies written decades earlier - 
and largely forgotten about - were developing huge losses. No one could intelligently estimate their total, 
but it was certain to be many tens of billions of dollars. The specter of unending and unlimited losses 
terrified existing names and scared away prospects. Many names opted for bankruptcy; some even chose 
suicide. 

From these shambles, there came a desperate effort to resuscitate Lloyd's. In 1996, the powers 
that be at the institution allotted £11.1 billion to a new company, Equitas, and made it responsible for 
paying all claims on policies written before 1993. In effect, this plan pooled the misery of the many 
syndicates in trouble. Of course, the money allotted could prove to be insufficient - and if that happened, 
the names remained liable for the shortfall. 

But the new plan, by concentrating all of the liabilities in one place, had the advantage of 
eliminating much of the costly intramural squabbling that went on among syndicates. Moreover, the 
pooling allowed claims evaluation, negotiation and litigation to be handled more intelligently than had been 
the case previously. Equitas embraced Ben Franklin's thinking: "We must all hang together, or assuredly 
we shall hang separately." 

From the start, many people predicted Equitas would eventually fail. But as Ajit and I reviewed 
the facts in the spring of 2006 - 13 years after the last exposed policy had been written and after the 
payment of £11.3 billion in claims - we concluded that the patient was likely to survive. And so we 
decided to offer a huge reinsurance policy to Equitas. 

Because plenty of imponderables continue to exist, Berkshire could not provide Equitas, and its 
27,972 names, unlimited protection. But we said - and I'm simplifying - that if Equitas would give us 
$7.12 billion in cash and securities (this is the float I spoke about), we would pay all of its future claims and 
expenses up to $13.9 billion. That amount was $5.7 billion above what Equitas had recently guessed its 
ultimate liabilities to be. Thus the names received a huge - and almost certainly sufficient - amount of 
future protection against unpleasant surprises. Indeed the protection is so large that Equitas plans a cash 
payment to its thousands of names, an event few of them had ever dreamed possible. 

And how will Berkshire fare? That depends on how much "known" claims will end up costing us, 
how many yet-to-be-presented claims will surface and what they will cost, how soon claim payments will 
be made and how much we earn on the cash we receive before it must be paid out. Ajit and I think the odds 
are in our favor. And should we be wrong, Berkshire can handle it. 

Scott Moser, the CEO of Equitas, summarized the transaction neatly: "Names wanted to sleep 
easy at night, and we think we've just bought them the world's best mattress." 

Warning: It's time to eat your broccoli - I am now going to talk about accounting matters. I owe 
this to those Berkshire shareholders who love reading about debits and credits. I hope both of you find this 
discussion helpful. All others can skip this section; there will be no quiz. 

Berkshire has done many retroactive transactions - in both number and amount a multiple of such 
policies entered into by any other insurer. We are the reinsurer of choice for these coverages because the 
obligations that are transferred to us - for example, lifetime indemnity and medical payments to be made to 
injured workers - may not be fully satisfied for 50 years or more. No other company can offer the certainty 


9 


that Berkshire can, in terms of guaranteeing the full and fair settlement of these obligations. This fact is 
important to the original insurer, policyholders and regulators. 

The accounting procedure for retroactive transactions is neither well known nor intuitive. The 
best way for shareholders to understand it, therefore, is for us to simply lay out the debits and credits. 
Charlie and I would like to see this done more often. We sometimes encounter accounting footnotes about 
important transactions that leave us baffled, and we go away suspicious that the reporting company wished 
it that way. (For example, try comprehending transactions "described" in the old 10-Ks of Enron, even 
after you know how the movie ended.) 

So let us summarize our accounting for the Equitas transaction. The major debits will be to Cash 
and Investments, Reinsurance Recoverable, and Deferred Charges for Reinsurance Assumed ("DCRA"). 
The major credit will be to Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expense. No profit or loss will be 
recorded at the inception of the transaction, but underwriting losses will thereafter be incurred annually as 
the DCRA asset is amortized downward. The amount of the annual amortization charge will be primarily 
determined by how our end-of-the-year estimates as to the timing and amount of future loss payments 
compare to the estimates made at the beginning of the year. Eventually, when the last claim has been paid, 
the DCRA account will be reduced to zero. That day is 50 years or more away. 

What's important to remember is that retroactive insurance contracts always produce underwriting 
losses for us. Whether these losses are worth experiencing depends on whether the cash we have received 
produces investment income that exceeds the losses. Recently our DCRA charges have annually delivered 
$300 million or so of underwriting losses, which have been more than offset by the income we have 
realized through use of the cash we received as a premium. Absent new retroactive contracts, the amount 
of the annual charge would normally decline over time. After the Equitas transaction, however, the annual 
DCRA cost will initially increase to about $450 million a year. This means that our other insurance 
operations must generate at least that much underwriting gain for our overall float to be cost-free. That 
amount is quite a hurdle but one that I believe we will clear in many, if not most, years. 


Aren't you glad that I promised you there would be no quiz? 


Manufacturing, Service and Retailing Operations 

Our activities in this part of Berkshire cover the waterfront. Let's look, though, at a summary 
balance sheet and earnings statement for the entire group. 


Balance Sheet 12/31/06 (in millions) 


Assets 

Cash and equivalents 

Accounts and notes receivable . 

Inventory 

Other current assets 

Total current assets 


& 1,543 
3,793 
5,257 
363 
10,956 


Liabilities and Equity 

Notes payable $ 1,468 

Other current liabilities 6,635 

Total current liabilities 8,103 


Goodwill and other intangibles 13,314 Deferred taxes 540 

Fixed assets 8,934 Term debt and other liabilities... 3,014 

Other assets 1,168 Equity 22,715 

$34.372 $34.372 


10 


Earnings Statement (in millions) 



2006 

2005 

2004 

Revenues 

$52,660 

$46,896 

$44,142 

Operating expenses (including depreciation of $823 in 2006, 




$699 in 2005 and $676 in 2004) 

49,002 

44,190 

41,604 

Interest expense 

132 

83 

57 

Pre-tax earnings 

3,526* 

2,623* 

2,481* 

Income taxes and minority interests 

1,395 

977 

941 

Net income 

$ 2,131 

$ 1.646 

$ 1.540 


*Does not include purchase-accounting adjustments. 

This motley group, which sells products ranging from lollipops to motor homes, earned a pleasing 
25% on average tangible net worth last year. It's noteworthy also that these operations used only minor 
financial leverage in achieving that return. Clearly we own some terrific businesses. We purchased many 
of them, however, at large premiums to net worth - a point reflected in the goodwill item shown on the 
balance sheet - and that fact reduces the earnings on our average carrying value to 10.8%. 

Here are a few newsworthy items about companies in this sector: 

• Bob Shaw, a remarkable entrepreneur who from a standing start built Shaw Industries into the 
country's largest carpet producer, elected last year, at age 75, to retire. To succeed him, Bob 
recommended Vance Bell, a 31-year veteran at Shaw, and Bob, as usual, made the right call. 
Weakness in housing has caused the carpet business to slow. Shaw, however, remains a 
powerhouse and a major contributor to Berkshire's earnings. 

• MiTek, a manufacturer of connectors for roof trusses at the time we purchased it in 2001, is 
developing into a mini-conglomerate. At the rate it is growing, in fact, "mini" may soon be 
inappropriate. In purchasing MiTek for $420 million, we lent the company $200 million at 9% 
and bought $198 million of stock, priced at $10,000 per share. Additionally, 55 employees bought 
2,200 shares for $22 million. Each employee paid exactly the same price that we did, in most 
cases borrowing money to do so. 

And are they ever glad they did! Five years later, MiTek' s sales have tripled and the stock is 
valued at $71,699 per share. Despite its making 14 acquisitions, at a cost of $291 million, MiTek 
has paid off its debt to Berkshire and holds $35 million of cash. We celebrated the fifth 
anniversary of our purchase with a party in July. I told the group that it would be embarrassing if 
MiTek's stock price soared beyond that of Berkshire "A" shares. Don't be surprised, however, if 
that happens (though Charlie and I will try to make our shares a moving target). 

• Not all of our businesses are destined to increase profits. When an industry's underlying 
economics are crumbling, talented management may slow the rate of decline. Eventually, though, 
eroding fundamentals will overwhelm managerial brilliance. (As a wise friend told me long ago, 
"If you want to get a reputation as a good businessman, be sure to get into a good business.") And 
fundamentals are definitely eroding in the newspaper industry, a trend that has caused the profits 
of our Buffalo News to decline. The skid will almost certainly continue. 

When Charlie and I were young, the newspaper business was as easy a way to make huge returns 
as existed in America. As one not-too-bright publisher famously said, "I owe my fortune to two 
great American institutions: monopoly and nepotism." No paper in a one -paper city, however bad 
the product or however inept the management, could avoid gushing profits. 

The industry's staggering returns could be simply explained. For most of the 20 th Century, 
newspapers were the primary source of information for the American public. Whether the subject 
was sports, finance, or politics, newspapers reigned supreme. Just as important, their ads were the 
easiest way to find job opportunities or to learn the price of groceries at your town's supermarkets. 


11 


The great majority of families therefore felt the need for a paper every day, but understandably 
most didn't wish to pay for two. Advertisers preferred the paper with the most circulation, and 
readers tended to want the paper with the most ads and news pages. This circularity led to a law 
of the newspaper jungle: Survival of the Fattest. 

Thus, when two or more papers existed in a major city (which was almost universally the case a 
century ago), the one that pulled ahead usually emerged as the stand-alone winner. After 
competition disappeared, the paper's pricing power in both advertising and circulation was 
unleashed. Typically, rates for both advertisers and readers would be raised annually - and the 
profits rolled in. For owners this was economic heaven. (Interestingly, though papers regularly - 
and often in a disapproving way - reported on the profitability of, say, the auto or steel industries, 
they never enlightened readers about their own Midas-like situation. Hmmm . . .) 

As long ago as my 1991 letter to shareholders, I nonetheless asserted that this insulated world was 
changing, writing that "the media businesses . . . will prove considerably less marvelous than I, the 
industry, or lenders thought would be the case only a few years ago." Some publishers took 
umbrage at both this remark and other warnings from me that followed. Newspaper properties, 
moreover, continued to sell as if they were indestructible slot machines. In fact, many intelligent 
newspaper executives who regularly chronicled and analyzed important worldwide events were 
either blind or indifferent to what was going on under their noses. 

Now, however, almost all newspaper owners realize that they are constantly losing ground in the 
battle for eyeballs. Simply put, if cable and satellite broadcasting, as well as the internet, had 
come along first, newspapers as we know them probably would never have existed. 

In Berkshire's world, Stan Lipsey does a terrific job running the Buffalo News, and I am 
enormously proud of its editor, Margaret Sullivan. The News' penetration of its market is the 
highest among that of this country's large newspapers. We also do better financially than most 
metropolitan newspapers, even though Buffalo's population and business trends are not good. 
Nevertheless, this operation faces unrelenting pressures that will cause profit margins to slide. 

True, we have the leading online news operation in Buffalo, and it will continue to attract more 
viewers and ads. However, the economic potential of a newspaper internet site - given the many 
alternative sources of information and entertainment that are free and only a click away - is at best 
a small fraction of that existing in the past for a print newspaper facing no competition. 

For a local resident, ownership of a city's paper, like ownership of a sports team, still produces 
instant prominence. With it typically comes power and influence. These are ruboffs that appeal to 
many people with money. Beyond that, civic-minded, wealthy individuals may feel that local 
ownership will serve their community well. That's why Peter Kiewit bought the Omaha paper 
more than 40 years ago. 

We are likely therefore to see non-economic individual buyers of newspapers emerge, just as we 
have seen such buyers acquire major sports franchises. Aspiring press lords should be careful, 
however: There's no rule that says a newspaper's revenues can't fall below its expenses and that 
losses can't mushroom. Fixed costs are high in the newspaper business, and that's bad news when 
unit volume heads south. As the importance of newspapers diminishes, moreover, the "psychic" 
value of possessing one will wane, whereas owning a sports franchise will likely retain its cachet. 

Unless we face an irreversible cash drain, we will stick with the News, just as we've said that we 
would. (Read economic principle 1 1, on page 76.) Charlie and I love newspapers - we each read 
five a day - and believe that a free and energetic press is a key ingredient for maintaining a great 
democracy. We hope that some combination of print and online will ward off economic 
doomsday for newspapers, and we will work hard in Buffalo to develop a sustainable business 
model. I think we will be successful. But the days of lush profits from our newspaper are over. 


12 


• A much improved situation is emerging at NetJets, which sells and manages fractionally-owned 
aircraft. This company has never had a problem growing: Revenues from flight operations have 
increased 596% since our purchase in 1998. But profits had been erratic. 

Our move to Europe, which began in 1996, was particularly expensive. After five years of 
operation there, we had acquired only 80 customers. And by mid-year 2006 our cumulative pre- 
tax loss had risen to $212 million. But European demand has now exploded, with a net of 589 
customers having been added in 2005-2006. Under Mark Booth's brilliant leadership, NetJets is 
now operating profitably in Europe, and we expect the positive trend to continue. 

Our U.S. operation also had a good year in 2006, which led to worldwide pre-tax earnings of $143 
million at NetJets last year. We made this profit even though we suffered a loss of $19 million in 
the first quarter. 

Credit Rich Santulli, along with Mark, for this turnaround. Rich, like many of our managers, has 
no financial need to work. But you'd never know it. He's absolutely tireless - monitoring 
operations, making sales, and traveling the globe to constantly widen the already-enormous lead 
that NetJets enjoys over its competitors. Today, the value of the fleet we manage is far greater 
than that managed by our three largest competitors combined. 

There's a reason NetJets is the runaway leader: It offers the ultimate in safety and service. At 
Berkshire, and at a number of our subsidiaries, NetJets aircraft are an indispensable business tool. 
I also have a contract for personal use with NetJets and so do members of my family and most 
Berkshire directors. (None of us, I should add, gets a discount.) Once you've flown NetJets, 
returning to commercial flights is like going back to holding hands. 

Regulated Utility Business 

Berkshire has an 86.6% (fully diluted) interest in MidAmerican Energy Holdings, which owns a 
wide variety of utility operations. The largest of these are (1) Yorkshire Electricity and Northern Electric, 
whose 3.7 million electric customers make it the third largest distributor of electricity in the U.K.; (2) 
MidAmerican Energy, which serves 706,000 electric customers, primarily in Iowa; (3) Pacific Power and 
Rocky Mountain Power, serving about 1.7 million electric customers in six western states; and (4) Kern 
River and Northern Natural pipelines, which carry about 8% of the natural gas consumed in the U.S. 

Our partners in ownership of MidAmerican are Walter Scott, and its two terrific managers, Dave 
Sokol and Greg Abel. It's unimportant how many votes each party has; we will make major moves only 
when we are unanimous in thinking them wise. Six years of working with Dave, Greg and Walter have 
underscored my original belief: Berkshire couldn't have better partners. 

Somewhat incongruously, MidAmerican owns the second largest real estate brokerage firm in the 
U.S., HomeServices of America. This company operates through 20 locally-branded firms with 20,300 
agents. Despite HomeServices' purchase of two operations last year, the company's overall volume fell 
9% to $58 billion, and profits fell 50%. 

The slowdown in residential real estate activity stems in part from the weakened lending practices 
of recent years. The "optional" contracts and "teaser" rates that have been popular have allowed borrowers 
to make payments in the early years of their mortgages that fall far short of covering normal interest costs. 
Naturally, there are few defaults when virtually nothing is required of a borrower. As a cynic has said, "A 
rolling loan gathers no loss." But payments not made add to principal, and borrowers who can't afford 
normal monthly payments early on are hit later with above-normal monthly obligations. This is the Scarlett 
O'Hara scenario: "I'll think about that tomorrow." For many home owners, "tomorrow" has now arrived. 
Consequently there is a huge overhang of offerings in several of HomeServices' markets. 

Nevertheless, we will be seeking to purchase additional brokerage operations. A decade from 
now, HomeServices will almost certainly be much larger. 


13 


Here are some key figures on MidAmerican' s operations: 

Earnings (in $ millions) 


2006 2005 

U.K. utilities $ 338 $ 308 

Iowa utility 348 288 

Western utilities (acquired March 21, 2006) 356 N/A 

Pipelines 376 309 

HomeServices 74 148 

Other (net) 226 115 

Earnings before corporate interest and taxes 1,718 1,168 

Interest, other than to Berkshire (261) (200) 

Interest on Berkshire junior debt (134) (157) 

Income tax (407) (248) 

Net earnings $ 916 $ 563 

Earnings applicable to Berkshire* $ 885 $ 523 

Debt owed to others 1 6,946 1 0,296 

Debt owed to Berkshire 1 ,055 1 ,289 


* Includes interest earned by Berkshire (net of related income taxes) of $87 in 2006 and $102 in 2005. 

Finance and Financial Products 

You will be happy to hear - and I'm even happier - that this will be my last discussion of the 
losses at Gen Re's derivative operation. When we started to wind this business down early in 2002, we had 
23,218 contracts outstanding. Now we have 197. Our cumulative pre-tax loss from this operation totals 
$409 million, but only $5 million occurred in 2006. Charlie says that if we had properly classified the $409 
million on our 2001 balance sheet, it would have been labeled "Good Until Reached For." In any event, a 
Shakespearean thought - slightly modified - seems appropriate for the tombstone of this derivative 
business: "All's well that ends." 

We've also wound up our investment in Value Capital. So earnings or losses from these two lines 
of business are making their final appearance in the table that annually appears in this section. 

Clayton Homes remains an anomaly in the manufactured-housing industry, which last year 
recorded its lowest unit sales since 1962. Indeed, the industry's volume last year was only about one-third 
that of 1999. Outside of Clayton, I doubt if the industry, overall, made any money in 2006. 

Yet Clayton earned $513 million pre-tax and paid Berkshire an additional $86 million as a fee for 
our obtaining the funds to finance Clayton's $10 billion portfolio of installment receivables. Berkshire's 
financial strength has clearly been of huge help to Clayton. But the driving force behind the company's 
success is Kevin Clayton. Kevin knows the business forward and backward, is a rational decision-maker 
and a joy to work with. Because of acquisitions, Clayton now employs 14,787 people, compared to 6,661 
at the time of our purchase. 

We have two leasing operations: CORT (furniture), run by Paul Arnold, and XTRA (truck 
trailers), run by Bill Franz. CORT's earnings improved significantly last year, and XTRA's remained at 
the high level attained in 2005. We continue to look for tuck-in acquisitions to be run by Paul or Bill, and 
also are open to ideas for new leasing opportunities. 


14 


Here's a breakdown of earnings in this sector: 

(in millions) 

Pre-Tax Earnings Interest-Bearing Liabilities 



2006 

2005 

2006 

2005 

Trading - ordinary income 

$ 274 

$ 200 

$ 600 

$1,061 

Gen Re Securities (loss) 

(5) 

(104) 

1,204* 

2,617* 

Life and annuity operation 

29 

11 

2,459 

2,461 

Value Capital (loss) 

6 

(33) 

N/A 

N/A 

Leasing operations 

182 

173 

261 

370 

Manufactured-housing finance (Clayton) 

513 

416 

10,498 

9,299 

Other 

158 

159 

N/A 

N/A 

Income before capital gains 

1,157 

822 



Trading - capital gains (losses) 

938 

(234) 



Total 

$ 2.095 

$ 588 




*Includes all liabilities 
Investments 

We show below our common stock investments. With two exceptions, those that had a market 
value of more than $700 million at the end of 2006 are itemized. We don't itemize the two securities 
referred to, which have a market value of $1.9 billion, because we continue to buy them. I could, of course, 
tell you their names. But then I would have to kill you. 

12/31/06 

Percentage of 


Shares 

Company 

Company Owned 

Cost* 

Market 




(in millions) 

151,610,700 

American Express Company 

12.6 

$ 1,287 

$ 9,198 

36,417,400 

Anheuser-Busch Cos., Inc 

4.7 

1,761 

1,792 

200,000,000 

The Coca-Cola Company 

8.6 

1,299 

9,650 

17,938,100 

Conoco Phillips 

1.1 

1,066 

1,291 

21,334,900 

Johnson & Johnson 

0.7 

1,250 

1,409 

6,708,760 

M&T Bank Corporation 

6.1 

103 

820 

48,000,000 

Moody's Corporation 

17.2 

499 

3,315 

2,338,961,000 

PetroChina "H" shares (or equivalents)... 

1.3 

488 

3,313 

3,486,006 

POSCO 

4.0 

572 

1,158 

100,000,000 

The Procter & Gamble Company 

3.2 

940 

6,427 

229,707,000 

Tesco 

2.9 

1,340 

1,820 

31,033,800 

US Bancorp 

1.8 

969 

1,123 

17,072,192 

USG Corp 

19.0 

536 

936 

19,944,300 

Wal-Mart Stores, Inc 

0.5 

942 

921 

1,727,765 

The Washington Post Company 

18.0 

11 

1,288 

218,169,300 

Wells Fargo & Company 

6.5 

3,697 

7,758 

1,724,200 

White Mountains Insurance 

16.0 

369 

999 


Others 


5,866 

8,315 


Total Common Stocks 


$22,995 

$61,533 


*This is our actual purchase price and also our tax basis; GAAP "cost" differs in a few cases 
because of write-ups or write-downs that have been required. 

We are delighted by the 2006 business performance of virtually all of our investees. Last year, we 
told you that our expectation was that these companies, in aggregate, would increase their earnings by 6% 
to 8% annually, a rate that would double their earnings every ten years or so. In 2006 American Express, 


15 


Coca-Cola, Procter & Gamble and Wells Fargo, our largest holdings, increased per-share earnings by 18%, 
9%, 8% and 11%. These are stellar results, and we thank their CEOs. 

We've come close to eliminating our direct foreign-exchange position, from which we realized 
about $186 million in pre-tax profits in 2006 (earnings that were included in the Finance and Financial 
Products table shown earlier). That brought our total gain since inception of this position in 2002 to $2.2 
billion. Here's a breakdown by currency: 

Total Gain (Loss) in Millions 


Australian dollar $247.1 Mexican peso $106.1 

British pound 287.2 New Zealand dollar 102.6 

Canadian dollar 398.3 Singapore dollar (2.6) 

Chinese yuan (12.7) South Korean won 261.3 

Euro 839.2 Swiss franc 9.6 

Hong Kong dollar (2.5) Taiwan dollar (45.3) 

Japanese yen 1 .9 Miscellaneous options 22.9 


We've made large indirect currency profits as well, though I've never tallied the precise amount. 
For example, in 2002-2003 we spent about $82 million buying - of all things - Enron bonds, some of 
which were denominated in Euros. Already we've received distributions of $179 million from these bonds, 
and our remaining stake is worth $173 million. That means our overall gain is $270 million, part of which 
came from the appreciation of the Euro that took place after our bond purchase. 

When we first began making foreign exchange purchases, interest-rate differentials between the 
U.S. and most foreign countries favored a direct currency position. But that spread turned negative in 
2005. We therefore looked for other ways to gain foreign-currency exposure, such as the ownership of 
foreign equities or of U.S. stocks with major earnings abroad. The currency factor, we should emphasize, 
is not dominant in our selection of equities, but is merely one of many considerations. 

As our U.S. trade problems worsen, the probability that the dollar will weaken over time continues 
to be high. I fervently believe in real trade - the more the better for both us and the world. We had about 
$1.44 trillion of this honest-to-God trade in 2006. But the U.S. also had $.76 trillion of pseudo-tmde last 
year - imports for which we exchanged no goods or services. (Ponder, for a moment, how commentators 
would describe the situation if our imports were $.76 trillion - a full 6% of GDP - and we had no exports.) 
Making these purchases that weren't reciprocated by sales, the U.S. necessarily transferred ownership of its 
assets or IOUs to the rest of the world. Like a very wealthy but self-indulgent family, we peeled off a bit of 
what we owned in order to consume more than we produced. 

The U.S. can do a lot of this because we are an extraordinarily rich country that has behaved 
responsibly in the past. The world is therefore willing to accept our bonds, real estate, stocks and 
businesses. And we have a vast store of these to hand over. 

These transfers will have consequences, however. Already the prediction I made last year about 
one fall-out from our spending binge has come true: The "investment income" account of our country - 
positive in every previous year since 1915 - turned negative in 2006. Foreigners now earn more on their 
U.S. investments than we do on our investments abroad. In effect, we've used up our bank account and 
turned to our credit card. And, like everyone who gets in hock, the U.S. will now experience "reverse 
compounding" as we pay ever-increasing amounts of interest on interest. 

I want to emphasize that even though our course is unwise, Americans will live better ten or 
twenty years from now than they do today. Per-capita wealth will increase. But our citizens will also be 
forced every year to ship a significant portion of their current production abroad merely to service the cost 
of our huge debtor position. It won't be pleasant to work part of each day to pay for the over-consumption 


16 


of your ancestors. I believe that at some point in the future U.S. workers and voters will find this annual 
"tribute" so onerous that there will be a severe political backlash. How that will play out in markets is 
impossible to predict - but to expect a "soft landing" seems like wishful thinking. 

I should mention that all of the direct currency profits we have realized have come from forward 
contracts, which are derivatives, and that we have entered into other types of derivatives contracts as well. 
That may seem odd, since you know of our expensive experience in unwinding the derivatives book at Gen 
Re and also have heard me talk of the systemic problems that could result from the enormous growth in the 
use of derivatives. Why, you may wonder, are we fooling around with such potentially toxic material? 

The answer is that derivatives, just like stocks and bonds, are sometimes wildly mispriced. For 
many years, accordingly, we have selectively written derivative contracts - few in number but sometimes 
for large dollar amounts. We currently have 62 contracts outstanding. I manage them personally, and they 
are free of counterparty credit risk. So far, these derivative contracts have worked out well for us, 
producing pre-tax profits in the hundreds of millions of dollars (above and beyond the gains I've itemized 
from forward foreign-exchange contracts). Though we will experience losses from time to time, we are 
likely to continue to earn - overall - significant profits from mispriced derivatives. 

I have told you that Berkshire has three outstanding candidates to replace me as CEO and that the 
Board knows exactly who should take over if I should die tonight. Each of the three is much younger than 
I. The directors believe it's important that my successor have the prospect of a long tenure. 

Frankly, we are not as well-prepared on the investment side of our business. There's a history 
here: At one time, Charlie was my potential replacement for investing, and more recently Lou Simpson has 
filled that slot. Lou is a top-notch investor with an outstanding long-term record of managing GEICO's 
equity portfolio. But he is only six years younger than I. If I were to die soon, he would fill in 
magnificently for a short period. For the long-term, though, we need a different answer. 

At our October board meeting, we discussed that subject fully. And we emerged with a plan, 
which I will carry out with the help of Charlie and Lou. 

Under this plan, I intend to hire a younger man or woman with the potential to manage a very 
large portfolio, who we hope will succeed me as Berkshire's chief investment officer when the need for 
someone to do that arises. As part of the selection process, we may in fact take on several candidates. 

Picking the right person(s) will not be an easy task. It's not hard, of course, to find smart people, 
among them individuals who have impressive investment records. But there is far more to successful long- 
term investing than brains and performance that has recently been good. 

Over time, markets will do extraordinary, even bizarre, things. A single, big mistake could wipe 
out a long string of successes. We therefore need someone genetically programmed to recognize and avoid 
serious risks, including those never before encountered. Certain perils that lurk in investment strategies 
cannot be spotted by use of the models commonly employed today by financial institutions. 

Temperament is also important. Independent thinking, emotional stability, and a keen 
understanding of both human and institutional behavior is vital to long-term investment success. I've seen 
a lot of very smart people who have lacked these virtues. 

Finally, we have a special problem to consider: our ability to keep the person we hire. Being able 
to list Berkshire on a resume would materially enhance the marketability of an investment manager. We 
will need, therefore, to be sure we can retain our choice, even though he or she could leave and make much 
more money elsewhere. 


17 


There are surely people who fit what we need, but they may be hard to identify. In 1979, Jack 
Byrne and I felt we had found such a person in Lou Simpson. We then made an arrangement with him 
whereby he would be paid well for sustained overperformance. Under this deal, he has earned large 
amounts. Lou, however, could have left us long ago to manage far greater sums on more advantageous 
terms. If money alone had been the object, that's exactly what he would have done. But Lou never 
considered such a move. We need to find a younger person or two made of the same stuff. 

The good news: At 76, I feel terrific and, according to all measurable indicators, am in excellent 
health. It's amazing what Cherry Coke and hamburgers will do for a fellow. 

Some Changes on Berkshire's Board 

The composition of our board will change in two ways this spring. One change will involve the 
Chace family, which has been connected to Berkshire and its predecessor companies for more than a 
century. In 1929, the first Malcolm G. Chace played an important role in merging four New England 
textile operations into Berkshire Fine Spinning Associates. That company merged with Hathaway 
Manufacturing in 1955 to form Berkshire Hathaway, and Malcolm G. Chace, Jr. became its chairman. 

Early in 1965, Malcolm arranged for Buffett Partnership Ltd. to buy a key block of Berkshire 
shares and welcomed us as the new controlling shareholder of the company. Malcolm continued as non- 
executive chairman until 1969. He was both a wonderful gentleman and helpful partner. 

That description also fits his son, Malcolm "Kim" Chace, who succeeded his father on Berkshire's 
board in 1992. But last year Kim, now actively and successfully running a community bank that he 
founded in 1996, suggested that we find a younger person to replace him on our board. We have done so, 
and Kim will step down as a director at the annual meeting. I owe much to the Chaces and wish to thank 
Kim for his many years of service to Berkshire. 

In selecting a new director, we were guided by our long-standing criteria, which are that board 
members be owner-oriented, business-savvy, interested and truly independent. I say "truly" because many 
directors who are now deemed independent by various authorities and observers are far from that, relying 
heavily as they do on directors' fees to maintain their standard of living. These payments, which come in 
many forms, often range between $150,000 and $250,000 annually, compensation that may approach or 
even exceed all other income of the "independent" director. And - surprise, surprise - director 
compensation has soared in recent years, pushed up by recommendations from corporate America's 
favorite consultant, Ratchet, Ratchet and Bingo. (The name may be phony, but the action it conveys is 
not.) 

Charlie and I believe our four criteria are essential if directors are to do their job - which, by law, 
is to faithfully represent owners. Yet these criteria are usually ignored. Instead, consultants and CEOs 
seeking board candidates will often say, "We're looking for a woman," or "a Hispanic," or "someone from 
abroad," or what have you. It sometimes sounds as if the mission is to stock Noah's ark. Over the years 
I've been queried many times about potential directors and have yet to hear anyone ask, "Does he think like 
an intelligent owner?" 

The questions I instead get would sound ridiculous to someone seeking candidates for, say, a 
football team, or an arbitration panel or a military command. In those cases, the selectors would look for 
people who had the specific talents and attitudes that were required for a specialized job. At Berkshire, we 
are in the specialized activity of running a business well, and therefore we seek business judgment. 

That's exactly what we've found in Susan Decker, CFO of Yahoo!, who will join our board at the 
annual meeting. We are lucky to have her: She scores very high on our four criteria and additionally, at 44, 
is young - an attribute, as you may have noticed, that your Chairman has long lacked. We will seek more 
young directors in the future, but never by slighting the four qualities that we insist upon. 


18 


This and That 

Berkshire will pay about $4.4 billion in federal income tax on its 2006 earnings. In its last fiscal 
year the U.S. Government spent $2.6 trillion, or about $7 billion per day. Thus, for more than half of one 
day, Berkshire picked up the tab for all federal expenditures, ranging from Social Security and Medicare 
payments to the cost of our armed services. Had there been only 600 taxpayers like Berkshire, no one else 
in America would have needed to pay any federal income or payroll taxes. 

Our federal return last year, we should add, ran to 9,386 pages. To handle this filing, state and 
foreign tax returns, a myriad of SEC requirements, and all of the other matters involved in running 
Berkshire, we have gone all the way up to 19 employees at World Headquarters. 

This crew occupies 9,708 square feet of space, and Charlie - at World Headquarters West in Los 
Angeles - uses another 655 square feet. Our home-office payroll, including benefits and counting both 
locations, totaled $3,531,978 last year. We're careful when spending your money. 

Corporate bigwigs often complain about government spending, criticizing bureaucrats who they 
say spend taxpayers' money differently from how they would if it were their own. But sometimes the 
financial behavior of executives will also vary based on whose wallet is getting depleted. Here's an 
illustrative tale from my days at Salomon. In the 1980s the company had a barber, Jimmy by name, who 
came in weekly to give free haircuts to the top brass. A manicurist was also on tap. Then, because of a 
cost-cutting drive, patrons were told to pay their own way. One top executive (not the CEO) who had 
previously visited Jimmy weekly went immediately to a once-every-three-weeks schedule. 

Every now and then Charlie and I catch on early to a tide -like trend, one brimming over with 
commercial promise. For example, though American Airlines (with its "miles") and American Express 
(with credit card points) are credited as being trailblazers in granting customers "rewards," Charlie and I 
were far ahead of them in spotting the appeal of this powerful idea. Excited by our insight, the two of us 
jumped into the reward business way back in 1970 by buying control of a trading stamp operation, Blue 
Chip Stamps. In that year, Blue Chip had sales of $126 million, and its stamps papered California. 

In 1970, indeed, about 60 billion of our stamps were licked by savers, pasted into books, and taken 
to Blue Chip redemption stores. Our catalog of rewards was 1 16 pages thick and chock full of tantalizing 
items. When I was told that even certain brothels and mortuaries gave stamps to their patrons, I felt I had 
finally found a sure thing. 

Well, not quite. From the day Charlie and I stepped into the Blue Chip picture, the business went 
straight downhill. By 1980, sales had fallen to $19.4 million. And, by 1990, sales were bumping along at 
$1.5 million. No quitter, I redoubled my managerial efforts. 

Sales then fell another 98%. Last year, in Berkshire's $98 billion of revenues, all of $25,920 (no 
zeros omitted) came from Blue Chip. Ever hopeful, Charlie and I soldier on. 

I mentioned last year that in my service on 19 corporate boards (not counting Berkshire or other 
controlled companies), I have been the Typhoid Mary of compensation committees. At only one company 
was I assigned to comp committee duty, and then I was promptly outvoted on the most crucial decision that 
we faced. My ostracism has been peculiar, considering that I certainly haven't lacked experience in setting 
CEO pay. At Berkshire, after all, I am a one-man compensation committee who determines the salaries 
and incentives for the CEOs of around 40 significant operating businesses. 


19 


How much time does this aspect of my job take? Virtually none. How many CEOs have 
voluntarily left us for other jobs in our 42-year history? Precisely none. 

Berkshire employs many different incentive arrangements, with their terms depending on such 
elements as the economic potential or capital intensity of a CEO's business. Whatever the compensation 
arrangement, though, I try to keep it both simple and fair. 

When we use incentives - and these can be large - they are always tied to the operating results for 
which a given CEO has authority. We issue no lottery tickets that carry payoffs unrelated to business 
performance. If a CEO bats .300, he gets paid for being a .300 hitter, even if circumstances outside of his 
control cause Berkshire to perform poorly. And if he bats .150, he doesn't get a payoff just because the 
successes of others have enabled Berkshire to prosper mightily. An example: We now own $61 billion of 
equities at Berkshire, whose value can easily rise or fall by 10% in a given year. Why in the world should 
the pay of our operating executives be affected by such $6 billion swings, however important the gain or 
loss may be for shareholders? 

You've read loads about CEOs who have received astronomical compensation for mediocre 
results. Much less well-advertised is the fact that America's CEOs also generally live the good life. Many, 
it should be emphasized, are exceptionally able, and almost all work far more than 40 hours a week. But 
they are usually treated like royalty in the process. (And we're certainly going to keep it that way at 
Berkshire. Though Charlie still favors sackcloth and ashes, I prefer to be spoiled rotten. Berkshire owns 
The Pampered Chef; our wonderful office group has made me The Pampered Chief.) 

CEO perks at one company are quickly copied elsewhere. "All the other kids have one" may seem 
a thought too juvenile to use as a rationale in the boardroom. But consultants employ precisely this 
argument, phrased more elegantly of course, when they make recommendations to comp committees. 

Irrational and excessive comp practices will not be materially changed by disclosure or by 
"independent" comp committee members. Indeed, I think it's likely that the reason I was rejected for 
service on so many comp committees was that I was regarded as too independent. Compensation reform 
will only occur if the largest institutional shareholders - it would only take a few - demand afresh look at 
the whole system. The consultants' present drill of deftly selecting "peer" companies to compare with their 
clients will only perpetuate present excesses. 

Last year I arranged for the bulk of my Berkshire holdings to go to five charitable foundations, 
thus carrying out part of my lifelong plan to eventually use all of my shares for philanthropic purposes. 
Details of the commitments I made, as well as the rationale for them, are posted on our website, 
www.berkshirehathaway.com . Taxes, I should note, had nothing to do with my decision or its timing. My 
federal and state income taxes in 2006 were exactly what they would have been had I not made my first 
contributions last summer, and the same point will apply to my 2007 contributions. 

In my will I've stipulated that the proceeds from all Berkshire shares I still own at death are to be 
used for philanthropic purposes within ten years after my estate is closed. Because my affairs are not 
complicated, it should take three years at most for this closing to occur. Adding this 13-year period to my 
expected lifespan of about 12 years (though, naturally, I'm aiming for more) means that proceeds from all 
of my Berkshire shares will likely be distributed for societal purposes over the next 25 years or so. 

I've set this schedule because I want the money to be spent relatively promptly by people I know 
to be capable, vigorous and motivated. These managerial attributes sometimes wane as institutions - 
particularly those that are exempt from market forces - age. Today, there are terrific people in charge at 
the five foundations. So at my death, why should they not move with dispatch to judiciously spend the 
money that remains? 


20 


Those people favoring perpetual foundations argue that in the future there will most certainly be 
large and important societal problems that philanthropy will need to address. I agree. But there will then 
also be many super-rich individuals and families whose wealth will exceed that of today's Americans and 
to whom philanthropic organizations can make their case for funding. These funders can then judge 
firsthand which operations have both the vitality and the focus to best address the major societal problems 
that then exist. In this way, a market test of ideas and effectiveness can be applied. Some organizations 
will deserve major support while others will have outlived their usefulness. Even if the people above 
ground make their decisions imperfectly, they should be able to allocate funds more rationally than a 
decedent six feet under will have ordained decades earlier. Wills, of course, can always be rewritten, but 
it's very unlikely that my thinking will change in a material way. 

A few shareholders have expressed concern that sales of Berkshire by the foundations receiving 
shares will depress the stock. These fears are unwarranted. The annual trading volume of many stocks 
exceeds 100% of the outstanding shares, but nevertheless these stocks usually sell at prices approximating 
their intrinsic value. Berkshire also tends to sell at an appropriate price, but with annual volume that is only 
15% of shares outstanding. At most, sales by the foundations receiving my shares will add three 
percentage points to annual trading volume, which will still leave Berkshire with a turnover ratio that is the 
lowest around. 

Overall, Berkshire's business performance will determine the price of our stock, and most of the 
time it will sell in a zone of reasonableness. It's important that the foundations receive appropriate prices 
as they periodically sell Berkshire shares, but it's also important that incoming shareholders don't overpay. 
(See economic principle 14 on page 77.) By both our policies and shareholder communications, Charlie 
and I will do our best to ensure that Berkshire sells at neither a large discount nor large premium to intrinsic 
value. 

The existence of foundation ownership will in no way influence our board's decisions about 
dividends, repurchases, or the issuance of shares. We will follow exactly the same rule that has guided us 
in the past: What action will be likely to deliver the best result for shareholders over time? 

In last year's report I allegorically described the Gotrocks family - a clan that owned all of 
America's businesses and that counterproductively attempted to increase its investment returns by paying 
ever-greater commissions and fees to "helpers." Sad to say, the "family" continued its self-destructive 
ways in 2006. 

In part the family persists in this folly because it harbors unrealistic expectations about obtainable 
returns. Sometimes these delusions are self-serving. For example, private pension plans can temporarily 
overstate their earnings, and public pension plans can defer the need for increased taxes, by using 
investment assumptions that are likely to be out of reach. Actuaries and auditors go along with these 
tactics, and it can be decades before the chickens come home to roost (at which point the CEO or public 
official who misled the world is apt to be gone). 

Meanwhile, Wall Street's Pied Pipers of Performance will have encouraged the futile hopes of the 
family. The hapless Gotrocks will be assured that they all can achieve above-average investment 
performance - but only by paying ever-higher fees. Call this promise the adult version of Lake Woebegon. 

In 2006, promises and fees hit new highs. A flood of money went from institutional investors to 
the 2-and-20 crowd. For those innocent of this arrangement, let me explain: It's a lopsided system whereby 
2% of your principal is paid each year to the manager even if he accomplishes nothing - or, for that matter, 
loses you a bundle - and, additionally, 20% of your profit is paid to him if he succeeds, even if his success 
is due simply to a rising tide. For example, a manager who achieves a gross return of 10% in a year will 
keep 3.6 percentage points - two points off the top plus 20% of the residual 8 points - leaving only 6.4 
percentage points for his investors. On a $3 billion fund, this 6.4% net "performance" will deliver the 
manager a cool $108 million. He will receive this bonanza even though an index fund might have returned 
15% to investors in the same period and charged them only a token fee. 


21 


The inexorable math of this grotesque arrangement is certain to make the Gotrocks family poorer 
over time than it would have been had it never heard of these "hyper-helpers." Even so, the 2-and-20 
action spreads. Its effects bring to mind the old adage: When someone with experience proposes a deal to 
someone with money, too often the fellow with money ends up with the experience, and the fellow with 
experience ends up with the money. 

Let me end this section by telling you about one of the good guys of Wall Street, my long-time 
friend Walter Schloss, who last year turned 90. From 1956 to 2002, Walter managed a remarkably 
successful investment partnership, from which he took not a dime unless his investors made money. My 
admiration for Walter, it should be noted, is not based on hindsight. A full fifty years ago, Walter was my 
sole recommendation to a St. Louis family who wanted an honest and able investment manager. 

Walter did not go to business school, or for that matter, college. His office contained one file 
cabinet in 1956; the number mushroomed to four by 2002. Walter worked without a secretary, clerk or 
bookkeeper, his only associate being his son, Edwin, a graduate of the North Carolina School of the Arts. 
Walter and Edwin never came within a mile of inside information. Indeed, they used "outside" information 
only sparingly, generally selecting securities by certain simple statistical methods Walter learned while 
working for Ben Graham. When Walter and Edwin were asked in 1989 by Outstanding Investors Digest, 
"How would you summarize your approach?" Edwin replied, "We try to buy stocks cheap." So much for 
Modern Portfolio Theory, technical analysis, macroeconomic thoughts and complex algorithms. 

Following a strategy that involved no real risk - defined as permanent loss of capital - Walter 
produced results over his 47 partnership years that dramatically surpassed those of the S&P 500. It's 
particularly noteworthy that he built this record by investing in about 1,000 securities, mostly of a 
lackluster type. A few big winners did not account for his success. It's safe to say that had millions of 
investment managers made trades by a) drawing stock names from a hat; b) purchasing these stocks in 
comparable amounts when Walter made a purchase; and then c) selling when Walter sold his pick, the 
luckiest of them would not have come close to equaling his record. There is simply no possibility that what 
Walter achieved over 47 years was due to chance. 

I first publicly discussed Walter's remarkable record in 1984. At that time "efficient market 
theory" (EMT) was the centerpiece of investment instruction at most major business schools. This theory, 
as then most commonly taught, held that the price of any stock at any moment is not demonstrably 
mispriced, which means that no investor can be expected to overperform the stock market averages using 
only publicly-available information (though some will do so by luck). When I talked about Walter 23 years 
ago, his record forcefully contradicted this dogma. 

And what did members of the academic community do when they were exposed to this new and 
important evidence? Unfortunately, they reacted in all-too-human fashion: Rather than opening their 
minds, they closed their eyes. To my knowledge no business school teaching EMT made any attempt to 
study Walter's performance and what it meant for the school's cherished theory. 

Instead, the faculties of the schools went merrily on their way presenting EMT as having the 
certainty of scripture. Typically, a finance instructor who had the nerve to question EMT had about as 
much chance of major promotion as Galileo had of being named Pope. 

Tens of thousands of students were therefore sent out into life believing that on every day the price 
of every stock was "right" (or, more accurately, not demonstrably wrong) and that attempts to evaluate 
businesses - that is, stocks - were useless. Walter meanwhile went on overperforming, his job made easier 
by the misguided instructions that had been given to those young minds. After all, if you are in the 
shipping business, it's helpful to have all of your potential competitors be taught that the earth is flat. 

Maybe it was a good thing for his investors that Walter didn't go to college. 


22 


The Annual Meeting 

Our meeting this year will be held on Saturday, May 5 th . As always, the doors will open at the 
Qwest Center at 7 a.m., and a new Berkshire movie will be shown at 8:30. At 9:30 we will go directly to 
the question-and-answer period, which (with a break for lunch at the Qwest' s stands) will last until 3:00. 
Then, after a short recess, Charlie and I will convene the annual meeting at 3:15. If you decide to leave 
during the day's question periods, please do so while Charlie is talking. 

The best reason to exit, of course is to shop. We will help you do that by filling the 194,300 
square foot hall that adjoins the meeting area with the products of Berkshire subsidiaries. Last year, the 
24,000 people who came to the meeting did their part, and almost every location racked up record sales. 
But records are made to be broken, and I know you can do better. 

This year we will again showcase a Clayton home (featuring Acme brick, Shaw carpet, Johns 
Manville insulation, MiTek fasteners, Carefree awnings and NFM furniture). You will find that the home, 
priced at $139,900, delivers excellent value. Last year, a helper at the Qwest bought one of two homes on 
display well before we opened the doors to shareholders. Flanking the Clayton home on the exhibition 
floor this year will be an RV and pontoon boat from Forest River. 

GEICO will have a booth staffed by a number of its top counselors from around the country, all of 
them ready to supply you with auto insurance quotes. In most cases, GEICO will be able to give you a 
special shareholder discount (usually 8%). This special offer is permitted by 45 of the 50 jurisdictions in 
which we operate. (One supplemental point: The discount is not additive if you qualify for another, such as 
that given certain groups.) Bring the details of your existing insurance and check out whether we can save 
you money. For at least 50% of you, I believe we can. And while you're at it, sign up for the new GEICO 
credit card. It's the one I now use (sparingly, of course). 

On Saturday, at the Omaha airport, we will have the usual array of aircraft from NetJets available 
for your inspection. Stop by the NetJets booth at the Qwest to learn about viewing these planes. Come to 
Omaha by bus; leave in your new plane. And take all the hair gel that you wish on board with you. 

In the Bookworm's corner of our bazaar, there will be about 25 books and DVDs - all discounted 
- led again by Poor Charlie's Almanack. (One hapless soul last year asked Charlie what he should do if he 
didn't enjoy the book. Back came a Mungerism: "No problem - just give it to someone more intelligent.") 
We've added a few titles this year. Among them are Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger by Peter 
Bevelin, a long-time Swedish shareholder of Berkshire, and Fred Schwed's classic, Where are the 
Customers' Yachts? This book was first published in 1940 and is now in its 4 th edition. The funniest book 
ever written about investing, it lightly delivers many truly important messages on the subject. 

An attachment to the proxy material that is enclosed with this report explains how you can obtain 
the credential you will need for admission to the meeting and other events. As for plane, hotel and car 
reservations, we have again signed up American Express (800-799-6634) to give you special help. Carol 
Pedersen, who handles these matters, does a terrific job for us each year, and I thank her for it. Hotel 
rooms can be hard to find, but work with Carol and you will get one. 

At Nebraska Furniture Mart, located on a 77-acre site on 72 nd Street between Dodge and Pacific, 
we will again be having "Berkshire Weekend" discount pricing. We initiated this special event at NFM ten 
years ago, and sales during the "Weekend" grew from $5.3 million in 1997 to $30 million in 2006. I get 
goose bumps just thinking about this volume. 

To obtain the Berkshire discount, you must make your purchases between Thursday, May 3 ld and 
Monday, May 7 th inclusive, and also present your meeting credential. The period's special pricing will 
even apply to the products of several prestigious manufacturers that normally have ironclad rules against 
discounting but which, in the spirit of our shareholder weekend, have made an exception for you. We 
appreciate their cooperation. NFM is open from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10 a.m. 


23 


to 6 p.m. on Sunday. On Saturday this year, from 5:30 p.m. to 8 p.m., NFM is having a special shareholder 
picnic featuring chicken and beef tacos (and hamburgers for traditionalists like me). 

At a remodeled and expanded Borsheim's, we will again have two shareholder-only events. The 
first will be a cocktail reception from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. on Friday, May 4 th . The second, the main gala, will 
be held on Sunday, May 6 th , from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. On Saturday, we will be open until 6 p.m. 

We will have huge crowds at Borsheim's throughout the weekend. For your convenience, 
therefore, shareholder prices will be available from Monday, April 30 th through Saturday, May 12 th . 
During that period, please identify yourself as a shareholder by presenting your meeting credentials or a 
brokerage statement that shows you are a Berkshire holder. 

On Sunday, in a tent outside of Borsheim's, a blindfolded Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess 
champion, will take on all comers - who will have their eyes wide open - in groups of six. Last year I 
carried on a conversation with Patrick while he played in this manner. Nearby, Norman Beck, a 
remarkable magician from Dallas, will bewilder onlookers. Additionally, we will have Bob Hamman and 
Sharon Osberg, two of the world's top bridge experts, available to play bridge with our shareholders on 
Sunday afternoon. 

To add to the Sunday fun at Borsheim's, Ariel Hsing will play table tennis (ping-pong to the 
uninitiated) from 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. against anyone brave enough to take her on. Ariel, though only 11, is 
ranked number one among girls under 16 in the U.S. (and number 1 among both boys and girls under 12). 
The week I turned 75 I played Ariel, then 9 and barely tall enough to see across the table, thinking I would 
take it easy on her so as not to crush her young spirit. Instead she crushed me. I've since devised a plan 
that will give me a chance against her. At 1 p.m. on Sunday, I will initiate play with a 2-point game against 
Ariel. If I somehow win the first point, I will then feign injury and claim victory. After this strenuous 
encounter wears Ariel down, our shareholders can then try their luck against her. 

Gorat's will again be open exclusively for Berkshire shareholders on Sunday, May 6 th , and will be 
serving from 4 p.m. until 10 p.m. Please remember that to come to Gorat's on that day, you must have a 
reservation. To make one, call 402-551-3733 on April 1 st {but not before). 

In the 2006-2007 school year, 35 university classes, including one from IBMEC in Brazil, will 
come to Omaha for sessions with me. I take almost all - in aggregate, more than 2,000 students - to lunch 
at Gorat's. And they love it. To learn why, come join us on Sunday. 

We will again have a reception at 4 p.m. on Saturday afternoon for shareholders who have come 
from outside of North America. Every year our meeting draws many people from around the globe, and 
Charlie and I want to be sure we personally greet those who have come so far. Last year we enjoyed 
meeting more than 400 of you from many dozens of countries. Any shareholder who comes from other 
than the U.S. or Canada will be given a special credential and instructions for attending this function. 

Charlie and I are extraordinarily lucky. We were born in America; had terrific parents who saw 
that we got good educations; have enjoyed wonderful families and great health; and came equipped with a 
"business" gene that allows us to prosper in a manner hugely disproportionate to other people who 
contribute as much or more to our society's well-being. Moreover, we have long had jobs that we love, in 
which we are helped every day in countless ways by talented and cheerful associates. No wonder we tap- 
dance to work. But nothing is more fun for us than getting together with our shareholder-partners at 
Berkshire's annual meeting. So join us on May 5 th at the Qwest for our annual Woodstock for Capitalists. 
We'll see you there. 

February 28, 2007 Warren E. Buffett 

Chairman of the Board 


24 


Berkshire's Corporate Performance vs. the S&P 500 


Annual Percentage Change 

in Per-Share in S&P 500 
Book Value of with Dividends Relative 

Berkshire Included Results 

Year (1) (2) (l)-(2) 

1965 23.8 10.0 13.8 

1966 20.3 (11.7) 32.0 

1967 11.0 30.9 (19.9) 

1968 19.0 11.0 8.0 

1969 16.2 (8.4) 24.6 

1970 12.0 3.9 8.1 

1971 16.4 14.6 1.8 

1972 21.7 18.9 2.8 

1973 4.7 (14.8) 19.5 

1974 5.5 (26.4) 31.9 

1975 21.9 37.2 (15.3) 

1976 59.3 23.6 35.7 

1977 31.9 (7.4) 39.3 

1978 24.0 6.4 17.6 

1979 35.7 18.2 17.5 

1980 19.3 32.3 (13.0) 

1981 31.4 (5.0) 36.4 

1982 40.0 21.4 18.6 

1983 32.3 22.4 9.9 

1984 13.6 6.1 7.5 

1985 48.2 31.6 16.6 

1986 26.1 18.6 7.5 

1987 19.5 5.1 14.4 

1988 20.1 16.6 3.5 

1989 44.4 31.7 12.7 

1990 7.4 (3.1) 10.5 

1991 39.6 30.5 9.1 

1992 20.3 7.6 12.7 

1993 14.3 10.1 4.2 

1994 13.9 1.3 12.6 

1995 43.1 37.6 5.5 

1996 31.8 23.0 8.8 

1997 34.1 33.4 .7 

1998 48.3 28.6 19.7 

1999 .5 21.0 (20.5) 

2000 6.5 (9.1) 15.6 

2001 (6.2) (11.9) 5.7 

2002 10.0 (22.1) 32.1 

2003 21.0 28.7 (7.7) 

2004 10.5 10.9 (.4) 

2005 6.4 4.9 1.5 

2006 18.4 15.8 2.6 

2007 11.0 5.5 5.5 

2008 (9.6) (37.0) 27.4 

2009 19.8 26.5 (6.7) 

Compounded Annual Gain - 1965-2009 20.3% 9.3% 11.0 

Overall Gain- 1964-2009 434,057% 5,430% 

Notes: Data are for calendar years with these exceptions: 1965 and 1966, year ended 9/30; 1967, 15 months ended 
12/31. 

Starting in 1979, accounting rules required insurance companies to value the equity securities they hold at market 
rather than at the lower of cost or market, which was previously the requirement. In this table, Berkshire's results 
through 1978 have been restated to conform to the changed rules. In all other respects, the results are calculated using 
the numbers originally reported. 

The S&P 500 numbers are pre-tax whereas the Berkshire numbers are after-tax. If a corporation such as Berkshire 
were simply to have owned the S&P 500 and accrued the appropriate taxes, its results would have lagged the S&P 500 
in years when that index showed a positive return, but would have exceeded the S&P 500 in years when the index 
showed a negative return. Over the years, the tax costs would have caused the aggregate lag to be substantial. 


2 


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC. 


To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.: 

Our gain in net worth during 2009 was $21.8 billion, which increased the per-share book value of both 
our Class A and Class B stock by 19.8%. Over the last 45 years (that is, since present management took over) 
book value has grown from $19 to $84,487, a rate of 20.3% compounded annually.* 

Berkshire's recent acquisition of Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) has added at least 65,000 
shareholders to the 500,000 or so already on our books. It's important to Charlie Munger, my long-time partner, 
and me that all of our owners understand Berkshire's operations, goals, limitations and culture. In each annual 
report, consequently, we restate the economic principles that guide us. This year these principles appear on pages 
89-94 and I urge all of you - but particularly our new shareholders - to read them. Berkshire has adhered to these 
principles for decades and will continue to do so long after I'm gone. 

In this letter we will also review some of the basics of our business, hoping to provide both a freshman 
orientation session for our BNSF newcomers and a refresher course for Berkshire veterans. 

How We Measure Ourselves 

Our metrics for evaluating our managerial performance are displayed on the facing page. From the start, 
Charlie and I have believed in having a rational and unbending standard for measuring what we have - or have 
not - accomplished. That keeps us from the temptation of seeing where the arrow of performance lands and then 
painting the bull's eye around it. 

Selecting the S&P 500 as our bogey was an easy choice because our shareholders, at virtually no cost, can 
match its performance by holding an index fund. Why should they pay us for merely duplicating that result? 

A more difficult decision for us was how to measure the progress of Berkshire versus the S&P. There are 
good arguments for simply using the change in our stock price. Over an extended period of time, in fact, that is 
the best test. But year-to-year market prices can be extraordinarily erratic. Even evaluations covering as long as a 
decade can be greatly distorted by foolishly high or low prices at the beginning or end of the measurement 
period. Steve Ballmer, of Microsoft, and Jeff Immelt, of GE, can tell you about that problem, suffering as they do 
from the nosebleed prices at which their stocks traded when they were handed the managerial baton. 

The ideal standard for measuring our yearly progress would be the change in Berkshire's per-share intrinsic 
value. Alas, that value cannot be calculated with anything close to precision, so we instead use a crude proxy for 
it: per-share book value. Relying on this yardstick has its shortcomings, which we discuss on pages 92 and 93. 
Additionally, book value at most companies understates intrinsic value, and that is certainly the case at 
Berkshire. In aggregate, our businesses are worth considerably more than the values at which they are carried on 
our books. In our all-important insurance business, moreover, the difference is huge. Even so, Charlie and I 
believe that our book value - understated though it is - supplies the most useful tracking device for changes in 
intrinsic value. By this measurement, as the opening paragraph of this letter states, our book value since the start 
of fiscal 1965 has grown at a rate of 20.3% compounded annually. 

*A11 per-share figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares. Figures for the B shares are 
1/1 500 th of those shown for A. 


3 


We should note that had we instead chosen market prices as our yardstick, Berkshire's results would 
look better, showing a gain since the start of fiscal 1965 of 22% compounded annually. Surprisingly, this modest 
difference in annual compounding rate leads to an 801,516% market-value gain for the entire 45-year period 
compared to the book-value gain of 434,057% (shown on page 2). Our market gain is better because in 1965 
Berkshire shares sold at an appropriate discount to the book value of its underearning textile assets, whereas 
today Berkshire shares regularly sell at a premium to the accounting values of its first-class businesses. 

Summed up, the table on page 2 conveys three messages, two positive and one hugely negative. First, 
we have never had any five-year period beginning with 1965-69 and ending with 2005-09 - and there have been 
41 of these - during which our gain in book value did not exceed the S&P's gain. Second, though we have lagged 
the S&P in some years that were positive for the market, we have consistently done better than the S&P in the 
eleven years during which it delivered negative results. In other words, our defense has been better than our 
offense, and that's likely to continue. 

The big minus is that our performance advantage has shrunk dramatically as our size has grown, an 
unpleasant trend that is certain to continue. To be sure, Berkshire has many outstanding businesses and a cadre of 
truly great managers, operating within an unusual corporate culture that lets them maximize their talents. Charlie 
and I believe these factors will continue to produce better-than-average results over time. But huge sums forge 
their own anchor and our future advantage, if any, will be a small fraction of our historical edge. 

What We Don't Do 

Long ago, Charlie laid out his strongest ambition: "All I want to know is where I'm going to die, so I'll 
never go there." That bit of wisdom was inspired by Jacobi, the great Prussian mathematician, who counseled 
"Invert, always invert" as an aid to solving difficult problems. (I can report as well that this inversion approach 
works on a less lofty level: Sing a country song in reverse, and you will quickly recover your car, house and 
wife.) 

Here are a few examples of how we apply Charlie's thinking at Berkshire: 

• Charlie and I avoid businesses whose futures we can't evaluate, no matter how exciting their 
products may be. In the past, it required no brilliance for people to foresee the fabulous growth 
that awaited such industries as autos (in 1910), aircraft (in 1930) and television sets (in 1950). But 
the future then also included competitive dynamics that would decimate almost all of the 
companies entering those industries. Even the survivors tended to come away bleeding. 

Just because Charlie and I can clearly see dramatic growth ahead for an industry does not mean 
we can judge what its profit margins and returns on capital will be as a host of competitors battle 
for supremacy. At Berkshire we will stick with businesses whose profit picture for decades to 
come seems reasonably predictable. Even then, we will make plenty of mistakes. 

• We will never become dependent on the kindness of strangers. Too-big-to-fail is not a fallback 
position at Berkshire. Instead, we will always arrange our affairs so that any requirements for cash 
we may conceivably have will be dwarfed by our own liquidity. Moreover, that liquidity will be 
constantly refreshed by a gusher of earnings from our many and diverse businesses. 

When the financial system went into cardiac arrest in September 2008, Berkshire was a supplier 
of liquidity and capital to the system, not a supplicant. At the very peak of the crisis, we poured 
$15.5 billion into a business world that could otherwise look only to the federal government for 
help. Of that, $9 billion went to bolster capital at three highly-regarded and previously-secure 
American businesses that needed - without delay - our tangible vote of confidence. The remaining 
$6.5 billion satisfied our commitment to help fund the purchase of Wrigley, a deal that was 
completed without pause while, elsewhere, panic reigned. 


4 


We pay a steep price to maintain our premier financial strength. The $20 billion-plus of cash- 
equivalent assets that we customarily hold is earning a pittance at present. But we sleep well. 

• We tend to let our many subsidiaries operate on their own, without our supervising and 
monitoring them to any degree. That means we are sometimes late in spotting management 
problems and that both operating and capital decisions are occasionally made with which Charlie 
and I would have disagreed had we been consulted. Most of our managers, however, use the 
independence we grant them magnificently, rewarding our confidence by maintaining an owner- 
oriented attitude that is invaluable and too seldom found in huge organizations. We would rather 
suffer the visible costs of a few bad decisions than incur the many invisible costs that come from 
decisions made too slowly - or not at all - because of a stifling bureaucracy. 

With our acquisition of BNSF, we now have about 257,000 employees and literally hundreds of 
different operating units. We hope to have many more of each. But we will never allow Berkshire 
to become some monolith that is overrun with committees, budget presentations and multiple 
layers of management. Instead, we plan to operate as a collection of separately-managed medium- 
sized and large businesses, most of whose decision-making occurs at the operating level. Charlie 
and I will limit ourselves to allocating capital, controlling enterprise risk, choosing managers and 
setting their compensation. 

• We make no attempt to woo Wall Street. Investors who buy and sell based upon media or analyst 
commentary are not for us. Instead we want partners who join us at Berkshire because they wish 
to make a long-term investment in a business they themselves understand and because it's one that 
follows policies with which they concur. If Charlie and I were to go into a small venture with a 
few partners, we would seek individuals in sync with us, knowing that common goals and a shared 
destiny make for a happy business "marriage" between owners and managers. Scaling up to giant 
size doesn't change that truth. 

To build a compatible shareholder population, we try to communicate with our owners directly 
and informatively. Our goal is to tell you what we would like to know if our positions were 
reversed. Additionally, we try to post our quarterly and annual financial information on the 
Internet early on weekends, thereby giving you and other investors plenty of time during a 
non-trading period to digest just what has happened at our multi-faceted enterprise. (Occasionally, 
SEC deadlines force a non-Friday disclosure.) These matters simply can't be adequately 
summarized in a few paragraphs, nor do they lend themselves to the kind of catchy headline that 
journalists sometimes seek. 

Last year we saw, in one instance, how sound-bite reporting can go wrong. Among the 12,830 
words in the annual letter was this sentence: "We are certain, for example, that the economy will 
be in shambles throughout 2009 - and probably well beyond - but that conclusion does not tell us 
whether the market will rise or fall." Many news organizations reported - indeed, blared - the first 
part of the sentence while making no mention whatsoever of its ending. I regard this as terrible 
journalism: Misinformed readers or viewers may well have thought that Charlie and I were 
forecasting bad things for the stock market, though we had not only in that sentence, but also 
elsewhere, made it clear we weren't predicting the market at all. Any investors who were misled 
by the sensationalists paid a big price: The Dow closed the day of the letter at 7,063 and finished 
the year at 10,428. 

Given a few experiences we've had like that, you can understand why I prefer that our 
communications with you remain as direct and unabridged as possible. 

Let's move to the specifics of Berkshire's operations. We have four major operating sectors, each 
differing from the others in balance sheet and income account characteristics. Therefore, lumping them together, 
as is standard in financial statements, impedes analysis. So we'll present them as four separate businesses, which 
is how Charlie and I view them. 


5 


Insurance 


Our property-casualty (P/C) insurance business has been the engine behind Berkshire's growth and will 
continue to be. It has worked wonders for us. We carry our P/C companies on our books at $15.5 billion more 
than their net tangible assets, an amount lodged in our "Goodwill" account. These companies, however, are 
worth far more than their carrying value - and the following look at the economic model of the P/C industry will 
tell you why. 

Insurers receive premiums upfront and pay claims later. In extreme cases, such as those arising from 
certain workers' compensation accidents, payments can stretch over decades. This collect-now, pay-later model 
leaves us holding large sums - money we call "float" - that will eventually go to others. Meanwhile, we get to 
invest this float for Berkshire's benefit. Though individual policies and claims come and go, the amount of float 
we hold remains remarkably stable in relation to premium volume. Consequently, as our business grows, so does 
our float. 

If premiums exceed the total of expenses and eventual losses, we register an underwriting profit that 
adds to the investment income produced from the float. This combination allows us to enjoy the use of free 
money - and, better yet, get paid for holding it. Alas, the hope of this happy result attracts intense competition, 
so vigorous in most years as to cause the P/C industry as a whole to operate at a significant underwriting loss. 
This loss, in effect, is what the industry pays to hold its float. Usually this cost is fairly low, but in some 
catastrophe-ridden years the cost from underwriting losses more than eats up the income derived from use of 
float. 

In my perhaps biased view, Berkshire has the best large insurance operation in the world. And I will 
absolutely state that we have the best managers. Our float has grown from $16 million in 1967, when we entered 
the business, to $62 billion at the end of 2009. Moreover, we have now operated at an underwriting profit for 
seven consecutive years. I believe it likely that we will continue to underwrite profitably in most - though 
certainly not all - future years. If we do so, our float will be cost-free, much as if someone deposited $62 billion 
with us that we could invest for our own benefit without the payment of interest. 

Let me emphasize again that cost-free float is not a result to be expected for the P/C industry as a 
whole: In most years, premiums have been inadequate to cover claims plus expenses. Consequently, the 
industry's overall return on tangible equity has for many decades fallen far short of that achieved by the S&P 
500. Outstanding economics exist at Berkshire only because we have some outstanding managers running some 
unusual businesses. Our insurance CEOs deserve your thanks, having added many billions of dollars to 
Berkshire's value. It's a pleasure for me to tell you about these all-stars. 

Let's start at GEICO, which is known to all of you because of its $800 million annual advertising 
budget (close to twice that of the runner-up advertiser in the auto insurance field). GEICO is managed by Tony 
Nicely, who joined the company at 18. Now 66, Tony still tap-dances to the office every day, just as I do at 79. 
We both feel lucky to work at a business we love. 

GEICO' s customers have warm feelings toward the company as well. Here's proof: Since Berkshire 
acquired control of GEICO in 1996, its market share has increased from 2.5% to 8.1%, a gain reflecting the net 
addition of seven million policyholders. Perhaps they contacted us because they thought our gecko was cute, but 
they bought from us to save important money. (Maybe you can as well; call 1-800-847-7536 or go to 
www.GEICO.com.) And they've stayed with us because they like our service as well as our price. 

Berkshire acquired GEICO in two stages. In 1976-80 we bought about one-third of the company's 
stock for $47 million. Over the years, large repurchases by the company of its own shares caused our position to 
grow to about 50% without our having bought any more shares. Then, on January 2, 1996, we acquired the 
remaining 50% of GEICO for $2.3 billion in cash, about 50 times the cost of our original purchase. 


6 


An old Wall Street joke gets close to our experience: 

Customer: Thanks for putting me in XYZ stock at 5. 1 hear it's up to 18. 

Broker: Yes, and that's just the beginning. In fact, the company is doing so well now, 
that it's an even better buy at 18 than it was when you made your purchase. 

Customer: Damn, I knew I should have waited. 

GEICO's growth may slow in 2010. U.S. vehicle registrations are actually down because of slumping 
auto sales. Moreover, high unemployment is causing a growing number of drivers to go uninsured. (That's illegal 
almost everywhere, but if you've lost your job and still want to drive . . .) Our "low-cost producer" status, 
however, is sure to give us significant gains in the future. In 1995, GEICO was the country's sixth largest auto 
insurer; now we are number three. The company's float has grown from $2.7 billion to $9.6 billion. Equally 
important, GEICO has operated at an underwriting profit in 13 of the 14 years Berkshire has owned it. 

I became excited about GEICO in January 1951, when I first visited the company as a 20-year-old 
student. Thanks to Tony, I'm even more excited today. 

A hugely important event in Berkshire's history occurred on a Saturday in 1985. Ajit Jain came into 
our office in Omaha - and I immediately knew we had found a superstar. (He had been discovered by Mike 
Goldberg, now elevated to St. Mike.) 

We immediately put Ajit in charge of National Indemnity's small and struggling reinsurance operation. 
Over the years, he has built this business into a one-of-a-kind giant in the insurance world. 

Staffed today by only 30 people, Ajit's operation has set records for transaction size in several areas of 
insurance. Ajit writes billion-dollar limits - and then keeps every dime of the risk instead of laying it off with 
other insurers. Three years ago, he took over huge liabilities from Lloyds, allowing it to clean up its relationship 
with 27,972 participants ("names") who had written problem-ridden policies that at one point threatened the 
survival of this 322-year-old institution. The premium for that single contract was $7.1 billion. During 2009, he 
negotiated a life reinsurance contract that could produce $50 billion of premium for us over the next 50 or so 
years. 

Ajit's business is just the opposite of GEICO's. At that company, we have millions of small policies 
that largely renew year after year. Ajit writes relatively few policies, and the mix changes significantly from year 
to year. Throughout the world, he is known as the man to call when something both very large and unusual needs 
to be insured. 

If Charlie, I and Ajit are ever in a sinking boat - and you can only save one of us - swim to Ajit. 

Our third insurance powerhouse is General Re. Some years back this operation was troubled; now it is 
a gleaming jewel in our insurance crown. 

Under the leadership of Tad Montross, General Re had an outstanding underwriting year in 2009, while 
also delivering us unusually large amounts of float per dollar of premium volume. Alongside General Re's P/C 
business, Tad and his associates have developed a major life reinsurance operation that has grown increasingly 
valuable. 

Last year General Re finally attained 100% ownership of Cologne Re, which since 1995 has been a 
key - though only partially-owned - part of our presence around the world. Tad and I will be visiting Cologne in 
September to thank its managers for their important contribution to Berkshire. 


7 


Finally, we own a group of smaller companies, most of them specializing in odd corners of the 
insurance world. In aggregate, their results have consistently been profitable and, as the table below shows, the 
float they provide us is substantial. Charlie and I treasure these companies and their managers. 

Here is the record of all four segments of our property-casualty and life insurance businesses: 


Underwriting Profit Yearend Float 
(in millions) 

Insurance Operations 2009 2008 2009 2008 

General Re $ 477 $ 342 $21,014 $21,074 

BH Reinsurance 349 1,324 26,223 24,221 

GEICO 649 916 9,613 8,454 

Other Primary 84 210 5,061 4,739 

$1,559 $2,792 $61,911 $58,488 


And now a painful confession: Last year your chairman closed the book on a very expensive business 
fiasco entirely of his own making. 

For many years I had struggled to think of side products that we could offer our millions of loyal 
GEICO customers. Unfortunately, I finally succeeded, coming up with a brilliant insight that we should market 
our own credit card. I reasoned that GEICO policyholders were likely to be good credit risks and, assuming we 
offered an attractive card, would likely favor us with their business. We got business all right - but of the wrong 
type. 

Our pre-tax losses from credit-card operations came to about $6.3 million before I finally woke up. We 
then sold our $98 million portfolio of troubled receivables for 550 on the dollar, losing an additional $44 million. 

GEICO' s managers, it should be emphasized, were never enthusiastic about my idea. They warned me 

that instead of getting the cream of GEICO' s customers we would get the well, let's call it the 

non-cream. I subtly indicated that I was older and wiser. 

I was just older. 

Regulated Utility Business 

Berkshire has an 89.5% interest in MidAmerican Energy Holdings, which owns a wide variety of 
utility operations. The largest of these are (1) Yorkshire Electricity and Northern Electric, whose 3.8 million end 
users make it the U.K.'s third largest distributor of electricity; (2) MidAmerican Energy, which serves 725,000 
electric customers, primarily in Iowa; (3) Pacific Power and Rocky Mountain Power, serving about 1.7 million 
electric customers in six western states; and (4) Kern River and Northern Natural pipelines, which carry about 
8% of the natural gas consumed in the U.S. 

MidAmerican has two terrific managers, Dave Sokol and Greg Abel. In addition, my long-time friend, 
Walter Scott, along with his family, has a major ownership position in the company. Walter brings extraordinary 
business savvy to any operation. Ten years of working with Dave, Greg and Walter have reinforced my original 
belief: Berkshire couldn't have better partners. They are truly a dream team. 

Somewhat incongruously, MidAmerican also owns the second largest real estate brokerage firm in the 
U.S., HomeServices of America. This company operates through 21 locally-branded firms that have 16,000 
agents. Though last year was again a terrible year for home sales, HomeServices earned a modest sum. It also 
acquired a firm in Chicago and will add other quality brokerage operations when they are available at sensible 
prices. A decade from now, HomeServices is likely to be much larger. 


8 


Here are some key figures on MidAmerican' s operations: 

Earnings ( in millions ) 


2009 2008 

U.K. utilities $ 248 $ 339 

Iowa utility 285 425 

Western utilities 788 703 

Pipelines 457 595 

HomeServices 43 (45) 

Other (net) 25 186 

Operating earnings before corporate interest and taxes 1,846 2,203 

Constellation Energy * — 1,092 

Interest, other than to Berkshire (318) (332) 

Interest on Berkshire junior debt (58) (HI) 

Income tax (313) (1,002) 

Net earnings $1,157 $1,850 


Earnings applicable to Berkshire ** $ 1,071 $ 1,704 

Debt owed to others 19,579 19,145 

Debt owed to Berkshire 353 1,087 


♦Consists of a breakup fee of $175 million and a profit on our investment of $917 million. 
**Includes interest earned by Berkshire (net of related income taxes) of $38 in 2009 and $72 in 2008. 

Our regulated electric utilities, offering monopoly service in most cases, operate in a symbiotic manner 
with the customers in their service areas, with those users depending on us to provide first-class service and 
invest for their future needs. Permitting and construction periods for generation and major transmission facilities 
stretch way out, so it is incumbent on us to be far-sighted. We, in turn, look to our utilities' regulators (acting on 
behalf of our customers) to allow us an appropriate return on the huge amounts of capital we must deploy to meet 
future needs. We shouldn't expect our regulators to live up to their end of the bargain unless we live up to ours. 

Dave and Greg make sure we do just that. National research companies consistently rank our Iowa and 
Western utilities at or near the top of their industry. Similarly, among the 43 U.S. pipelines ranked by a firm 
named Mastio, our Kern River and Northern Natural properties tied for second place. 

Moreover, we continue to pour huge sums of money into our operations so as to not only prepare for 
the future but also make these operations more environmentally friendly. Since we purchased MidAmerican ten 
years ago, it has never paid a dividend. We have instead used earnings to improve and expand our properties in 
each of the territories we serve. As one dramatic example, in the last three years our Iowa and Western utilities 
have earned $2.5 billion, while in this same period spending $3 billion on wind generation facilities. 

MidAmerican has consistently kept its end of the bargain with society and, to society's credit, it has 
reciprocated: With few exceptions, our regulators have promptly allowed us to earn a fair return on the ever- 
increasing sums of capital we must invest. Going forward, we will do whatever it takes to serve our territories in 
the manner they expect. We believe that, in turn, we will be allowed the return we deserve on the funds we 
invest. 

In earlier days, Charlie and I shunned capital-intensive businesses such as public utilities. Indeed, the 
best businesses by far for owners continue to be those that have high returns on capital and that require little 
incremental investment to grow. We are fortunate to own a number of such businesses, and we would love to buy 
more. Anticipating, however, that Berkshire will generate ever-increasing amounts of cash, we are today quite 
willing to enter businesses that regularly require large capital expenditures. We expect only that these businesses 
have reasonable expectations of earning decent returns on the incremental sums they invest. If our expectations 
are met - and we believe that they will be - Berkshire's ever-growing collection of good to great businesses 
should produce above-average, though certainly not spectacular, returns in the decades ahead. 


9 


Our BNSF operation, it should be noted, has certain important economic characteristics that resemble 
those of our electric utilities. In both cases we provide fundamental services that are, and will remain, essential to 
the economic well-being of our customers, the communities we serve, and indeed the nation. Both will require 
heavy investment that greatly exceeds depreciation allowances for decades to come. Both must also plan far 
ahead to satisfy demand that is expected to outstrip the needs of the past. Finally, both require wise regulators 
who will provide certainty about allowable returns so that we can confidently make the huge investments 
required to maintain, replace and expand the plant. 

We see a "social compact" existing between the public and our railroad business, just as is the case 
with our utilities. If either side shirks its obligations, both sides will inevitably suffer. Therefore, both parties to 
the compact should - and we believe will - understand the benefit of behaving in a way that encourages good 
behavior by the other. It is inconceivable that our country will realize anything close to its full economic 
potential without its possessing first-class electricity and railroad systems. We will do our part to see that they 
exist. 


In the future, BNSF results will be included in this "regulated utility" section. Aside from the two 
businesses having similar underlying economic characteristics, both are logical users of substantial amounts of 
debt that is not guaranteed by Berkshire. Both will retain most of their earnings. Both will earn and invest large 
sums in good times or bad, though the railroad will display the greater cyclically. Overall, we expect this 
regulated sector to deliver significantly increased earnings over time, albeit at the cost of our investing many tens 
- yes, tens - of billions of dollars of incremental equity capital. 

Manufacturing, Service and Retailing Operations 

Our activities in this part of Berkshire cover the waterfront. Let's look, though, at a summary balance 
sheet and earnings statement for the entire group. 


Balance Sheet 


Assets 

Cash and equivalents $ 3,018 

Accounts and notes receivable 5,066 

Inventory 6,147 

Other current assets 625 

Total current assets 14,856 

Goodwill and other intangibles 1 6,499 

Fixed assets 15,374 

Other assets 2,070 

$48,799 


(in millions) 


Liabilities and Equity 

Notes payable $ 1,842 

Other current liabilities 7,414 

Total current liabilities 9,256 

Deferred taxes 2,834 

Term debt and other liabilities 6,240 

Equity 30,469 

$48,799 


Earnings Statement ( in millions ) 


2009 2008 2007 


Revenues $61,665 $66,099 $59,100 

Operating expenses (including depreciation of $1,422 in 2009, $1,280 in 2008 

and $955 in 2007) 59,509 61,937 55,026 

Interest expense 98 139 127 

Pre-tax earnings 2,058* 4,023* 3,947* 

Income taxes and minority interests 945 1,740 1,594 

Net income $ 1,113 $ 2,283 $ 2,353 


*Does not include purchase-accounting adjustments. 


10 


Almost all of the many and widely-diverse operations in this sector suffered to one degree or another 


from 2009' s severe recession. The major exception was McLane, our distributor of groceries, confections and 
non-food items to thousands of retail outlets, the largest by far Wal-Mart. 

Grady Rosier led McLane to record pre-tax earnings of $344 million, which even so amounted to only 
slightly more than one cent per dollar on its huge sales of $31.2 billion. McLane employs a vast array of physical 
assets - practically all of which it owns - including 3,242 trailers, 2,309 tractors and 55 distribution centers with 
15.2 million square feet of space. McLane' s prime asset, however, is Grady. 

We had a number of companies at which profits improved even as sales contracted, always an 
exceptional managerial achievement. Here are the CEOs who made it happen: 


Among the businesses we own that have major exposure to the depressed industrial sector, both 
Marmon and Iscar turned in relatively strong performances. Frank Ptak's Marmon delivered a 13.5% pre-tax 
profit margin, a record high. Though the company's sales were down 27%, Frank's cost-conscious management 
mitigated the decline in earnings. 

Nothing stops Israel-based Iscar - not wars, recessions or competitors. The world's two other leading 
suppliers of small cutting tools both had very difficult years, each operating at a loss throughout much of the 
year. Though Iscar' s results were down significantly from 2008, the company regularly reported profits, even 
while it was integrating and rationalizing Tungaloy, the large Japanese acquisition that we told you about last 
year. When manufacturing rebounds, Iscar will set new records. Its incredible managerial team of Eitan 
Wertheimer, Jacob Harpaz and Danny Goldman will see to that. 

Every business we own that is connected to residential and commercial construction suffered severely 
in 2009. Combined pre-tax earnings of Shaw, Johns Manville, Acme Brick, and MiTek were $227 million, an 
82.5% decline from $1,295 billion in 2006, when construction activity was booming. These businesses continue 
to bump along the bottom, though their competitive positions remain undented. 

The major problem for Berkshire last year was NetJets, an aviation operation that offers fractional 
ownership of jets. Over the years, it has been enormously successful in establishing itself as the premier company 
in its industry, with the value of its fleet far exceeding that of its three major competitors combined. Overall, our 
dominance in the field remains unchallenged. 

NetJets' business operation, however, has been another story. In the eleven years that we have owned 
the company, it has recorded an aggregate pre-tax loss of $157 million. Moreover, the company's debt has soared 
from $102 million at the time of purchase to $1.9 billion in April of last year. Without Berkshire's guarantee of 
this debt, NetJets would have been out of business. It's clear that I failed you in letting NetJets descend into this 
condition. But, luckily, I have been bailed out. 


COMPANY 


CEO 


Benjamin Moore (paint) 

Borsheims (jewelry retailing) 

H. H. Brown (manufacturing and retailing of shoes) 

CTB (agricultural equipment) 

Dairy Queen 

Nebraska Furniture Mart (furniture retailing) 
Pampered Chef (direct sales of kitchen tools) 
See's (manufacturing and retailing of candy) 
Star Furniture (furniture retailing) 


Denis Abrams 
Susan Jacques 
Jim Issler 
Vic Mancinelli 
John Gainor 
Ron and Irv Blumkin 
Maria Gottschalk 
Brad Kinstler 
Bill Kimbrell 


11 


Dave Sokol, the enormously talented builder and operator of MidAmerican Energy, became CEO of 
NetJets in August. His leadership has been transforming: Debt has already been reduced to $1.4 billion, and, after 
suffering a staggering loss of $71 1 million in 2009, the company is now solidly profitable. 

Most important, none of the changes wrought by Dave have in any way undercut the top-of-the-line 
standards for safety and service that Rich Santulli, NetJets' previous CEO and the father of the fractional- 
ownership industry, insisted upon. Dave and I have the strongest possible personal interest in maintaining these 
standards because we and our families use NetJets for almost all of our flying, as do many of our directors and 
managers. None of us are assigned special planes nor crews. We receive exactly the same treatment as any other 
owner, meaning we pay the same prices as everyone else does when we are using our personal contracts. In short, 
we eat our own cooking. In the aviation business, no other testimonial means more. 

Finance and Financial Products 

Our largest operation in this sector is Clayton Homes, the country's leading producer of modular and 
manufactured homes. Clayton was not always number one: A decade ago the three leading manufacturers were 
Fleetwood, Champion and Oakwood, which together accounted for 44% of the output of the industry. All have 
since gone bankrupt. Total industry output, meanwhile, has fallen from 382,000 units in 1999 to 60,000 units in 
2009. 

The industry is in shambles for two reasons, the first of which must be lived with if the U.S. economy 
is to recover. This reason concerns U.S. housing starts (including apartment units). In 2009, starts were 554,000, 
by far the lowest number in the 50 years for which we have data. Paradoxically, this is good news. 

People thought it was good news a few years back when housing starts - the supply side of the picture 
- were running about two million annually. But household formations - the demand side - only amounted to 
about 1.2 million. After a few years of such imbalances, the country unsurprisingly ended up with far too many 
houses. 

There were three ways to cure this overhang: (1) blow up a lot of houses, a tactic similar to the 
destruction of autos that occurred with the "cash-for-clunkers" program; (2) speed up household formations by, 
say, encouraging teenagers to cohabitate, a program not likely to suffer from a lack of volunteers or; (3) reduce 
new housing starts to a number far below the rate of household formations. 

Our country has wisely selected the third option, which means that within a year or so residential 
housing problems should largely be behind us, the exceptions being only high-value houses and those in certain 
localities where overbuilding was particularly egregious. Prices will remain far below "bubble" levels, of course, 
but for every seller (or lender) hurt by this there will be a buyer who benefits. Indeed, many families that couldn't 
afford to buy an appropriate home a few years ago now find it well within their means because the bubble burst. 

The second reason that manufactured housing is troubled is specific to the industry: the punitive 
differential in mortgage rates between factory-built homes and site-built homes. Before you read further, let me 
underscore the obvious: Berkshire has a dog in this fight, and you should therefore assess the commentary that 
follows with special care. That warning made, however, let me explain why the rate differential causes problems 
for both large numbers of lower-income Americans and Clayton. 

The residential mortgage market is shaped by government rules that are expressed by FHA, Freddie 
Mac and Fannie Mae. Their lending standards are all-powerful because the mortgages they insure can typically 
be securitized and turned into what, in effect, is an obligation of the U.S. government. Currently buyers of 
conventional site-built homes who qualify for these guarantees can obtain a 30-year loan at about 5 14%. In 
addition, these are mortgages that have recently been purchased in massive amounts by the Federal Reserve, an 
action that also helped to keep rates at bargain-basement levels. 

In contrast, very few factory-built homes qualify for agency-insured mortgages. Therefore, a 
meritorious buyer of a factory-built home must pay about 9% on his loan. For the all-cash buyer, Clayton's 
homes offer terrific value. If the buyer needs mortgage financing, however - and, of course, most buyers do - the 
difference in financing costs too often negates the attractive price of a factory-built home. 


12 


Last year I told you why our buyers - generally people with low incomes - performed so well as credit 
risks. Their attitude was all-important: They signed up to live in the home, not resell or refinance it. 
Consequently, our buyers usually took out loans with payments geared to their verified incomes (we weren't 
making "liar's loans") and looked forward to the day they could burn their mortgage. If they lost their jobs, had 
health problems or got divorced, we could of course expect defaults. But they seldom walked away simply 
because house values had fallen. Even today, though job-loss troubles have grown, Clayton's delinquencies and 
defaults remain reasonable and will not cause us significant problems. 

We have tried to qualify more of our customers' loans for treatment similar to those available on the 
site-built product. So far we have had only token success. Many families with modest incomes but responsible 
habits have therefore had to forego home ownership simply because the financing differential attached to the 
factory -built product makes monthly payments too expensive. If qualifications aren't broadened, so as to open 
low-cost financing to all who meet down-payment and income standards, the manufactured-home industry seems 
destined to struggle and dwindle. 

Even under these conditions, I believe Clayton will operate profitably in coming years, though well 
below its potential. We couldn't have a better manager than CEO Kevin Clayton, who treats Berkshire's interests 
as if they were his own. Our product is first-class, inexpensive and constantly being improved. Moreover, we will 
continue to use Berkshire's credit to support Clayton's mortgage program, convinced as we are of its soundness. 
Even so, Berkshire can't borrow at a rate approaching that available to government agencies. This handicap will 
limit sales, hurting both Clayton and a multitude of worthy families who long for a low-cost home. 

In the following table, Clayton's earnings are net of the company's payment to Berkshire for the use of 
its credit. Offsetting this cost to Clayton is an identical amount of income credited to Berkshire's finance 
operation and included in "Other Income." The cost and income amount was $116 million in 2009 and $92 
million in 2008. 

The table also illustrates how severely our furniture (CORT) and trailer (XTRA) leasing operations 
have been hit by the recession. Though their competitive positions remain as strong as ever, we have yet to see 
any bounce in these businesses. 

Pre-Tax Earnings 

(in millions) 
2009 2008 


Net investment income $278 $330 

Life and annuity operation 116 23 

Leasing operations 14 87 

Manufactured-housing finance (Clayton) 187 206 

Other income * 186 141 

Income before investment and derivatives gains or losses $781 $787 


^'Includes $116 million in 2009 and $92 million in 2008 of fees that Berkshire charges Clayton for the 
use of Berkshire's credit. 

At the end of 2009, we became a 50% owner of Berkadia Commercial Mortgage (formerly known as 
Capmark), the country's third-largest servicer of commercial mortgages. In addition to servicing a $235 billion 
portfolio, the company is an important originator of mortgages, having 25 offices spread around the country. 
Though commercial real estate will face major problems in the next few years, long-term opportunities for 
Berkadia are significant. 


13 


Our partner in this operation is Leucadia, run by Joe Steinberg and Ian Cumming, with whom we had a 
terrific experience some years back when Berkshire joined with them to purchase Finova, a troubled finance 
business. In resolving that situation, Joe and Ian did far more than their share of the work, an arrangement I 
always encourage. Naturally, I was delighted when they called me to partner again in the Capmark purchase. 

Our first venture was also christened Berkadia. So let's call this one Son of Berkadia. Someday I'll be 
writing you about Grandson of Berkadia. 

Investments 

Below we show our common stock investments that at yearend had a market value of more than $1 billion. 


12/31/09 


Shares 

Company 

Percentage of 
Company 
Owned 

Cost * 

Market 




( in mi 

Ulions) 

151,610,700 

American Express Company 

12.7 

$ 1,287 

$ 6,143 

225,000,000 

BYD Company, Ltd 

9.9 

232 

1,986 

200,000,000 

The Coca-Cola Company 

8.6 

1,299 

11,400 

37,711,330 

ConocoPhillips 

2.5 

2,741 

1,926 

28,530,467 

Johnson & Johnson 

1.0 

1,724 

1,838 

130,272,500 

Kraft Foods Inc 

8.8 

4,330 

3,541 

3,947,554 

POSCO 

5.2 

768 

2,092 

83,128,411 

The Procter & Gamble Company 

2.9 

533 

5,040 

25,108,967 

Sanofi-Aventis 

1.9 

2,027 

1,979 

234,247,373 

Tesco pic 

3.0 

1,367 

1,620 

76,633,426 

U.S. Bancorp 

4.0 

2,371 

1,725 

39,037,142 

Wal-Mart Stores, Inc 

1.0 

1,893 

2,087 

334,235,585 

Wells Fargo & Company 

6.5 

7,394 

9,021 


Others 


6,680 

8,636 


Total Common Stocks Carried at Market 


$34,646 

$59,034 


*This is our actual purchase price and also our tax basis; GAAP "cost" differs in a few cases because of 
write-ups or write-downs that have been required. 

In addition, we own positions in non-traded securities of Dow Chemical, General Electric, Goldman 
Sachs, Swiss Re and Wrigley with an aggregate cost of $21.1 billion and a carrying value of $26.0 billion. We 
purchased these five positions in the last 18 months. Setting aside the significant equity potential they provide us, 
these holdings deliver us an aggregate of $2.1 billion annually in dividends and interest. Finally, we owned 
76,777,029 shares (22.5%) of BNSF at yearend, which we then carried at $85.78 per share, but which have 
subsequently been melded into our purchase of the entire company. 

In 2009, our largest sales were in ConocoPhillips, Moody's, Procter & Gamble and Johnson & Johnson 
(sales of the latter occurring after we had built our position earlier in the year). Charlie and I believe that all of 
these stocks will likely trade higher in the future. We made some sales early in 2009 to raise cash for our Dow 
and Swiss Re purchases and late in the year made other sales in anticipation of our BNSF purchase. 


14 


We told you last year that very unusual conditions then existed in the corporate and municipal bond 
markets and that these securities were ridiculously cheap relative to U.S. Treasuries. We backed this view with 
some purchases, but I should have done far more. Big opportunities come infrequently. When it's raining gold, 
reach for a bucket, not a thimble. 

We entered 2008 with $44.3 billion of cash-equivalents, and we have since retained operating earnings 
of $17 billion. Nevertheless, at yearend 2009, our cash was down to $30.6 billion (with $8 billion earmarked for 
the BNSF acquisition). We've put a lot of money to work during the chaos of the last two years. It's been an 
ideal period for investors: A climate of fear is their best friend. Those who invest only when commentators are 
upbeat end up paying a heavy price for meaningless reassurance. In the end, what counts in investing is what you 
pay for a business - through the purchase of a small piece of it in the stock market - and what that business earns 
in the succeeding decade or two. 

Last year I wrote extensively about our derivatives contracts, which were then the subject of both 
controversy and misunderstanding. For that discussion, please go to www.berkshirehathaway.com. 

We have since changed only a few of our positions. Some credit contracts have run off. The terms of 
about 10% of our equity put contracts have also changed: Maturities have been shortened and strike prices 
materially reduced. In these modifications, no money changed hands. 

A few points from last year's discussion are worth repeating: 

(1) Though it's no sure thing, I expect our contracts in aggregate to deliver us a profit over their lifetime, 
even when investment income on the huge amount of float they provide us is excluded in the 
calculation. Our derivatives float - which is not included in the $62 billion of insurance float I 
described earlier - was about $6.3 billion at yearend. 

(2) Only a handful of our contracts require us to post collateral under any circumstances. At last year's low 
point in the stock and credit markets, our posting requirement was $1.7 billion, a small fraction of the 
derivatives-related float we held. When we do post collateral, let me add, the securities we put up 
continue to earn money for our account. 

(3) Finally, you should expect large swings in the carrying value of these contracts, items that can affect 
our reported quarterly earnings in a huge way but that do not affect our cash or investment holdings. 
That thought certainly fit 2009' s circumstances. Here are the pre-tax quarterly gains and losses from 
derivatives valuations that were part of our reported earnings last year: 


Quarter $ Gain (Loss) in Billions 

1 (1.517) 

2 2.357 

3 1.732 

4 1.052 


As we've explained, these wild swings neither cheer nor bother Charlie and me. When we report to 
you, we will continue to separate out these figures (as we do realized investment gains and losses) so that you can 
more clearly view the earnings of our operating businesses. We are delighted that we hold the derivatives 
contracts that we do. To date we have significantly profited from the float they provide. We expect also to earn 
further investment income over the life of our contracts. 


15 


We have long invested in derivatives contracts that Charlie and I think are mispriced, just as we try to 
invest in mispriced stocks and bonds. Indeed, we first reported to you that we held such contracts in early 1998. 
The dangers that derivatives pose for both participants and society - dangers of which we've long warned, and 
that can be dynamite - arise when these contracts lead to leverage and/or counterparty risk that is extreme. At 
Berkshire nothing like that has occurred - nor will it. 

It's my job to keep Berkshire far away from such problems. Charlie and I believe that a CEO must not 
delegate risk control. It's simply too important. At Berkshire, I both initiate and monitor every derivatives 
contract on our books, with the exception of operations-related contracts at a few of our subsidiaries, such as 
MidAmerican, and the minor runoff contracts at General Re. If Berkshire ever gets in trouble, it will be my fault. 
It will not be because of misjudgments made by a Risk Committee or Chief Risk Officer. 

In my view a board of directors of a huge financial institution is derelict if it does not insist that its 
CEO bear full responsibility for risk control. If he's incapable of handling that job, he should look for other 
employment. And if he fails at it - with the government thereupon required to step in with funds or guarantees - 
the financial consequences for him and his board should be severe. 

It has not been shareholders who have botched the operations of some of our country's largest financial 
institutions. Yet they have borne the burden, with 90% or more of the value of their holdings wiped out in most 
cases of failure. Collectively, they have lost more than $500 billion in just the four largest financial fiascos of the 
last two years. To say these owners have been "bailed-out" is to make a mockery of the term. 

The CEOs and directors of the failed companies, however, have largely gone unscathed. Their fortunes may 
have been diminished by the disasters they oversaw, but they still live in grand style. It is the behavior of these 
CEOs and directors that needs to be changed: If their institutions and the country are harmed by their 
recklessness, they should pay a heavy price - one not reimbursable by the companies they've damaged nor by 
insurance. CEOs and, in many cases, directors have long benefitted from oversized financial carrots; some 
meaningful sticks now need to be part of their employment picture as well. 

An Inconvenient Truth (Boardroom Overheating) 

Our subsidiaries made a few small "bolt-on" acquisitions last year for cash, but our blockbuster deal 
with BNSF required us to issue about 95,000 Berkshire shares that amounted to 6.1% of those previously 
outstanding. Charlie and I enjoy issuing Berkshire stock about as much as we relish prepping for a colonoscopy. 

The reason for our distaste is simple. If we wouldn't dream of selling Berkshire in its entirety at the 
current market price, why in the world should we "sell" a significant part of the company at that same inadequate 
price by issuing our stock in a merger? 

In evaluating a stock-for-stock offer, shareholders of the target company quite understandably focus on 
the market price of the acquirer's shares that are to be given them. But they also expect the transaction to deliver 
them the intrinsic value of their own shares - the ones they are giving up. If shares of a prospective acquirer are 
selling below their intrinsic value, it's impossible for that buyer to make a sensible deal in an all-stock deal. You 
simply can't exchange an undervalued stock for a fully-valued one without hurting your shareholders. 

Imagine, if you will, Company A and Company B, of equal size and both with businesses intrinsically 
worth $100 per share. Both of their stocks, however, sell for $80 per share. The CEO of A, long on confidence 
and short on smarts, offers 1 Va shares of A for each share of B, correctly telling his directors that B is worth $100 
per share. He will neglect to explain, though, that what he is giving will cost his shareholders $125 in intrinsic 
value. If the directors are mathematically challenged as well, and a deal is therefore completed, the shareholders 
of B will end up owning 55.6% of A & B's combined assets and A's shareholders will own 44.4%. Not everyone 
at A, it should be noted, is a loser from this nonsensical transaction. Its CEO now runs a company twice as large 
as his original domain, in a world where size tends to correlate with both prestige and compensation. 


16 


If an acquirer's stock is overvalued, it's a different story: Using it as a currency works to the acquirer's 
advantage. That's why bubbles in various areas of the stock market have invariably led to serial issuances of 
stock by sly promoters. Going by the market value of their stock, they can afford to overpay because they are, in 
effect, using counterfeit money. Periodically, many air-for-assets acquisitions have taken place, the late 1960s 
having been a particularly obscene period for such chicanery. Indeed, certain large companies were built in this 
way. (No one involved, of course, ever publicly acknowledges the reality of what is going on, though there is 
plenty of private snickering.) 

In our BNSF acquisition, the selling shareholders quite properly evaluated our offer at $100 per share. 
The cost to us, however, was somewhat higher since 40% of the $100 was delivered in our shares, which Charlie 
and I believed to be worth more than their market value. Fortunately, we had long owned a substantial amount of 
BNSF stock that we purchased in the market for cash. All told, therefore, only about 30% of our cost overall was 
paid with Berkshire shares. 

In the end, Charlie and I decided that the disadvantage of paying 30% of the price through stock was 
offset by the opportunity the acquisition gave us to deploy $22 billion of cash in a business we understood and 
liked for the long term. It has the additional virtue of being run by Matt Rose, whom we trust and admire. We 
also like the prospect of investing additional billions over the years at reasonable rates of return. But the final 
decision was a close one. If we had needed to use more stock to make the acquisition, it would in fact have made 
no sense. We would have then been giving up more than we were getting. 

I have been in dozens of board meetings in which acquisitions have been deliberated, often with the 
directors being instructed by high-priced investment bankers (are there any other kind?). Invariably, the bankers 
give the board a detailed assessment of the value of the company being purchased, with emphasis on why it is 
worth far more than its market price. In more than fifty years of board memberships, however, never have I heard 
the investment bankers (or management!) discuss the true value of what is being given. When a deal involved the 
issuance of the acquirer's stock, they simply used market value to measure the cost. They did this even though 
they would have argued that the acquirer's stock price was woefully inadequate — absolutely no indicator of its 
real value — had a takeover bid for the acquirer instead been the subject up for discussion. 

When stock is the currency being contemplated in an acquisition and when directors are hearing from 
an advisor, it appears to me that there is only one way to get a rational and balanced discussion. Directors should 
hire a second advisor to make the case against the proposed acquisition, with its fee contingent on the deal not 
going through. Absent this drastic remedy, our recommendation in respect to the use of advisors remains: "Don't 
ask the barber whether you need a haircut." 

I can't resist telling you a true story from long ago. We owned stock in a large well-run bank that for 
decades had been statutorily prevented from acquisitions. Eventually, the law was changed and our bank 
immediately began looking for possible purchases. Its managers - fine people and able bankers - not 
unexpectedly began to behave like teenage boys who had just discovered girls. 

They soon focused on a much smaller bank, also well-run and having similar financial characteristics 
in such areas as return on equity, interest margin, loan quality, etc. Our bank sold at a modest price (that's why 
we had bought into it), hovering near book value and possessing a very low price/earnings ratio. Alongside, 
though, the small-bank owner was being wooed by other large banks in the state and was holding out for a price 
close to three times book value. Moreover, he wanted stock, not cash. 

Naturally, our fellows caved in and agreed to this value-destroying deal. "We need to show that we are 
in the hunt. Besides, it's only a small deal," they said, as if only major harm to shareholders would have been a 
legitimate reason for holding back. Charlie's reaction at the time: "Are we supposed to applaud because the dog 
that fouls our lawn is a Chihuahua rather than a Saint Bernard?" 


17 


The seller of the smaller bank - no fool - then delivered one final demand in his negotiations. "After 
the merger," he in effect said, perhaps using words that were phrased more diplomatically than these, "I'm going 
to be a large shareholder of your bank, and it will represent a huge portion of my net worth. You have to promise 
me, therefore, that you'll never again do a deal this dumb." 

Yes, the merger went through. The owner of the small bank became richer, we became poorer, and the 
managers of the big bank - newly bigger - lived happily ever after. 

The Annual Meeting 

Our best guess is that 35,000 people attended the annual meeting last year (up from 12 - no zeros 
omitted - in 1981). With our shareholder population much expanded, we expect even more this year. Therefore, 
we will have to make a few changes in the usual routine. There will be no change, however, in our enthusiasm 
for having you attend. Charlie and I like to meet you, answer your questions and - best of all - have you buy lots 
of goods from our businesses. 

The meeting this year will be held on Saturday, May 1 st . As always, the doors will open at the Qwest 
Center at 7 a.m., and a new Berkshire movie will be shown at 8:30. At 9:30 we will go directly to the 
question-and-answer period, which (with a break for lunch at the Qwest's stands) will last until 3:30. After a 
short recess, Charlie and I will convene the annual meeting at 3:45. If you decide to leave during the day's 
question periods, please do so while Charlie is talking. (Act fast; he can be terse.) 

The best reason to exit, of course, is to shop. We will help you do that by filling the 194,300-square- 
foot hall that adjoins the meeting area with products from dozens of Berkshire subsidiaries. Last year, you did 
your part, and most locations racked up record sales. But you can do better. (A friendly warning: If I find sales 
are lagging, I get testy and lock the exits.) 

GEICO will have a booth staffed by a number of its top counselors from around the country, all of 
them ready to supply you with auto insurance quotes. In most cases, GEICO will be able to give you a 
shareholder discount (usually 8%). This special offer is permitted by 44 of the 51 jurisdictions in which we 
operate. (One supplemental point: The discount is not additive if you qualify for another, such as that given 
certain groups.) Bring the details of your existing insurance and check out whether we can save you money. For 
at least 50% of you, I believe we can. 

Be sure to visit the Bookworm. Among the more than 30 books and DVDs it will offer are two new 
books by my sons: Howard's Fragile, a volume filled with photos and commentary about lives of struggle 
around the globe and Peter's Life Is What You Make It. Completing the family trilogy will be the debut of my 
sister Doris's biography, a story focusing on her remarkable philanthropic activities. Also available will be Poor 
Charlie 's Almanack, the story of my partner. This book is something of a publishing miracle - never advertised, 
yet year after year selling many thousands of copies from its Internet site. (Should you need to ship your book 
purchases, a nearby shipping service will be available.) 

If you are a big spender - or, for that matter, merely a gawker - visit Elliott Aviation on the east side of 
the Omaha airport between noon and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. There we will have a fleet of NetJets aircraft that 
will get your pulse racing. 

An attachment to the proxy material that is enclosed with this report explains how you can obtain the 
credential you will need for admission to the meeting and other events. As for plane, hotel and car reservations, 
we have again signed up American Express (800-799-6634) to give you special help. Carol Pedersen, who 
handles these matters, does a terrific job for us each year, and I thank her for it. Hotel rooms can be hard to find, 
but work with Carol and you will get one. 


18 


At Nebraska Furniture Mart, located on a 77-acre site on 72 nd Street between Dodge and Pacific, we 
will again be having "Berkshire Weekend" discount pricing. To obtain the Berkshire discount, you must make 
your purchases between Thursday, April 29 th and Monday, May 3 rd inclusive, and also present your meeting 
credential. The period's special pricing will even apply to the products of several prestigious manufacturers that 
normally have ironclad rules against discounting but which, in the spirit of our shareholder weekend, have made 
an exception for you. We appreciate their cooperation. NFM is open from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through 
Saturday, and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday. On Saturday this year, from 5:30 p.m. to 8 p.m., NFM is having a 
Berkyville BBQ to which you are all invited. 

At Borsheims, we will again have two shareholder-only events. The first will be a cocktail reception 
from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. on Friday, April 30 th . The second, the main gala, will be held on Sunday, May 2 nd , from 9 
a.m. to 4 p.m. On Saturday, we will be open until 6 p.m. 

We will have huge crowds at Borsheims throughout the weekend. For your convenience, therefore, 
shareholder prices will be available from Monday, April 26 th through Saturday, May 8 th . During that period, 
please identify yourself as a shareholder by presenting your meeting credentials or a brokerage statement that 
shows you are a Berkshire holder. Enter with rhinestones; leave with diamonds. My daughter tells me that the 
more you buy, the more you save (kids say the darnedest things). 

On Sunday, in the mall outside of Borsheims, a blindfolded Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess champion, 
will take on all comers - who will have their eyes wide open - in groups of six. Nearby, Norman Beck, a 
remarkable magician from Dallas, will bewilder onlookers. 

Our special treat for shareholders this year will be the return of my friend, Ariel Hsing, the country's 
top-ranked junior table tennis player (and a good bet to win at the Olympics some day). Now 14, Ariel came to 
the annual meeting four years ago and demolished all comers, including me. (You can witness my humiliating 
defeat on YouTube; just type in Ariel Hsing Berkshire.) 

Naturally, I've been plotting a comeback and will take her on outside of Borsheims at 1:00 p.m. on 
Sunday. It will be a three-point match, and after I soften her up, all shareholders are invited to try their luck at 
similar three-point contests. Winners will be given a box of See's candy. We will have equipment available, but 
bring your own paddle if you think it will help. (It won't.) 

Gorat's will again be open exclusively for Berkshire shareholders on Sunday, May 2 nd , and will be 
serving from 1 p.m. until 10 p.m. Last year, though, it was overwhelmed by demand. With many more diners 
expected this year, I've asked my friend, Donna Sheehan, at Piccolo's - another favorite restaurant of mine - to 
serve shareholders on Sunday as well. (Piccolo's giant root beer float is mandatory for any fan of fine dining.) I 
plan to eat at both restaurants: All of the weekend action makes me really hungry, and I have favorite dishes at 
each spot. Remember: To make a reservation at Gorat's, call 402-551-3733 on April 1 st (but not before) and at 
Piccolo's call 402-342-9038. 

Regrettably, we will not be able to have a reception for international visitors this year. Our count grew 
to about 800 last year, and my simply signing one item per person took about 2 Vi hours. Since we expect even 
more international visitors this year, Charlie and I decided we must drop this function. But be assured, we 
welcome every international visitor who comes. 

Last year we changed our method of determining what questions would be asked at the meeting and 
received many dozens of letters applauding the new arrangement. We will therefore again have the same three 
financial journalists lead the question-and-answer period, asking Charlie and me questions that shareholders have 
submitted to them by e-mail. 


19 


The journalists and their e-mail addresses are: Carol Loomis, of Fortune, who may be e-mailed at 
cloomis@fortunemail.com; Becky Quick, of CNBC, at BerkshireQuestions@cnbc.com, and Andrew Ross 
Sorkin, of The New York Times, at arsorkin@nytimes.com. From the questions submitted, each journalist will 
choose the dozen or so he or she decides are the most interesting and important. The journalists have told me 
your question has the best chance of being selected if you keep it concise and include no more than two questions 
in any e-mail you send them. (In your e-mail, let the journalist know if you would like your name mentioned if 
your question is selected.) 

Neither Charlie nor I will get so much as a clue about the questions to be asked. We know the 
journalists will pick some tough ones and that's the way we like it. 

We will again have a drawing at 8:15 on Saturday at each of 13 microphones for those shareholders 
wishing to ask questions themselves. At the meeting, I will alternate the questions asked by the journalists with 
those from the winning shareholders. We've added 30 minutes to the question time and will probably have time 
for about 30 questions from each group. 

At 86 and 79, Charlie and I remain lucky beyond our dreams. We were born in America; had terrific 
parents who saw that we got good educations; have enjoyed wonderful families and great health; and came 
equipped with a "business" gene that allows us to prosper in a manner hugely disproportionate to that 
experienced by many people who contribute as much or more to our society's well-being. Moreover, we have 
long had jobs that we love, in which we are helped in countless ways by talented and cheerful associates. Indeed, 
over the years, our work has become ever more fascinating; no wonder we tap-dance to work. If pushed, we 
would gladly pay substantial sums to have our jobs (but don't tell the Comp Committee). 

Nothing, however, is more fun for us than getting together with our shareholder-partners at Berkshire's 
annual meeting. So join us on May 1 st at the Qwest for our annual Woodstock for Capitalists. We'll see you 
there. 

February 26, 20 1 Warren E. Buffett 

Chairman of the Board 

P.S. Come by rail. 


20 


Berkshire's Corporate Performance vs. the S&P 500 


Annual Percentage Change 

in Per-Share in S&P 500 

Book Value of with Dividends Relative 

Berkshire Included Results 

Year (1) (2) (l)-(2) 

1965 23.8 10.0 13.8 

1966 20.3 (11.7) 32.0 

1967 11.0 30.9 (19.9) 

1968 19.0 11.0 8.0 

1969 16.2 (8.4) 24.6 

1970 12.0 3.9 8.1 

1971 16.4 14.6 1.8 

1972 21.7 18.9 2.8 

1973 4.7 (14.8) 19.5 

1974 5.5 (26.4) 31.9 

1975 21.9 37.2 (15.3) 

1976 59.3 23.6 35.7 

1977 31.9 (7.4) 39.3 

1978 24.0 6.4 17.6 

1979 35.7 18.2 17.5 

1980 19.3 32.3 (13.0) 

1981 31.4 (5.0) 36.4 

1982 40.0 21.4 18.6 

1983 32.3 22.4 9.9 

1984 13.6 6.1 7.5 

1985 48.2 31.6 16.6 

1986 26.1 18.6 7.5 

1987 19.5 5.1 14.4 

1988 20.1 16.6 3.5 

1989 44.4 31.7 12.7 

1990 7.4 (3.1) 10.5 

1991 39.6 30.5 9.1 

1992 20.3 7.6 12.7 

1993 14.3 10.1 4.2 

1994 13.9 1.3 12.6 

1995 43.1 37.6 5.5 

1996 31.8 23.0 8.8 

1997 34.1 33.4 .7 

1998 48.3 28.6 19.7 

1999 .5 21.0 (20.5) 

2000 6.5 (9.1) 15.6 

2001 (6.2) (11.9) 5.7 

2002 10.0 (22.1) 32.1 

2003 21.0 28.7 (7.7) 

2004 10.5 10.9 (.4) 

2005 6.4 4.9 1.5 

2006 18.4 15.8 2.6 

2007 11.0 5.5 5.5 

2008 (9.6) (37.0) 27.4 

2009 19.8 26.5 (6.7) 

2010 13.0 15.1 (2.1) 

Compounded Annual Gain- 1965-2010 20.2% 9.4% 10.8 

Overall Gain- 1964-2010 490,409% 6,262% 

Notes: Data are for calendar years with these exceptions: 1965 and 1966, year ended 9/30; 1967, 15 months ended 
12/31. 

Starting in 1979, accounting rules required insurance companies to value the equity securities they hold at market 

rather than at the lower of cost or market, which was previously the requirement. In this table, Berkshire's results 
through 1978 have been restated to conform to the changed rules. In all other respects, the results are calculated using 
the numbers originally reported. 

The S&P 500 numbers are pre-tax whereas the Berkshire numbers are after-tax. If a corporation such as Berkshire 
were simply to have owned the S&P 500 and accrued the appropriate taxes, its results would have lagged the S&P 500 
in years when that index showed a positive return, but would have exceeded the S&P 500 in years when the index 
showed a negative return. Over the years, the tax costs would have caused the aggregate lag to be substantial. 


2 


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC. 


To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.: 

The per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock increased by 13% in 2010. Over the 
last 46 years (that is, since present management took over), book value has grown from $19 to $95,453, a rate of 
20.2% compounded annually.* 

The highlight of 2010 was our acquisition of Burlington Northern Santa Fe, a purchase that's working 
out even better than I expected. It now appears that owning this railroad will increase Berkshire's "normal" 
earning power by nearly 40% pre-tax and by well over 30% after-tax. Making this purchase increased our share 
count by 6% and used $22 billion of cash. Since we've quickly replenished the cash, the economics of this 
transaction have turned out very well. 

A "normal year," of course, is not something that either Charlie Munger, Vice Chairman of Berkshire 
and my partner, or I can define with anything like precision. But for the purpose of estimating our current earning 
power, we are envisioning a year free of a mega-catastrophe in insurance and possessing a general business 
climate somewhat better than that of 2010 but weaker than that of 2005 or 2006. Using these assumptions, and 
several others that I will explain in the "Investment" section, I can estimate that the normal earning power of the 
assets we currently own is about $17 billion pre-tax and $12 billion after-tax, excluding any capital gains or 
losses. Every day Charlie and I think about how we can build on this base. 

Both of us are enthusiastic about BNSF's future because railroads have major cost and environmental 
advantages over trucking, their main competitor. Last year BNSF moved each ton of freight it carried a record 
500 miles on a single gallon of diesel fuel. That's three times more fuel-efficient than trucking is, which means 
our railroad owns an important advantage in operating costs. Concurrently, our country gains because of reduced 
greenhouse emissions and a much smaller need for imported oil. When traffic travels by rail, society benefits. 

Over time, the movement of goods in the United States will increase, and BNSF should get its full 
share of the gain. The railroad will need to invest massively to bring about this growth, but no one is better 
situated than Berkshire to supply the funds required. However slow the economy, or chaotic the markets, our 
checks will clear. 

Last year - in the face of widespread pessimism about our economy - we demonstrated our enthusiasm 
for capital investment at Berkshire by spending $6 billion on property and equipment. Of this amount, 
$5.4 billion - or 90% of the total - was spent in the United States. Certainly our businesses will expand abroad in 
the future, but an overwhelming part of their future investments will be at home. In 2011, we will set a new 
record for capital spending - $8 billion - and spend all of the $2 billion increase in the United States. 

Money will always flow toward opportunity, and there is an abundance of that in America. 
Commentators today often talk of "great uncertainty." But think back, for example, to December 6, 
1941, October 18, 1987 and September 10, 2001. No matter how serene today may be, tomorrow is always 
uncertain. 

* All per-share figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares. Figures for the B shares are 
1/1 500 th of those shown for A. 


3 


Don't let that reality spook you. Throughout my lifetime, politicians and pundits have constantly 
moaned about terrifying problems facing America. Yet our citizens now live an astonishing six times better than 
when I was born. The prophets of doom have overlooked the all-important factor that is certain: Human potential 
is far from exhausted, and the American system for unleashing that potential - a system that has worked wonders 
for over two centuries despite frequent interruptions for recessions and even a Civil War - remains alive and 
effective. 

We are not natively smarter than we were when our country was founded nor do we work harder. But 
look around you and see a world beyond the dreams of any colonial citizen. Now, as in 1776, 1861, 1932 and 
1941, America's best days lie ahead. 

Performance 

Charlie and I believe that those entrusted with handling the funds of others should establish 
performance goals at the onset of their stewardship. Lacking such standards, managements are tempted to shoot 
the arrow of performance and then paint the bull's-eye around wherever it lands. 

In Berkshire's case, we long ago told you that our job is to increase per-share intrinsic value at a rate 
greater than the increase (including dividends) of the S&P 500. In some years we succeed; in others we fail. But, 
if we are unable over time to reach that goal, we have done nothing for our investors, who by themselves could 
have realized an equal or better result by owning an index fund. 

The challenge, of course, is the calculation of intrinsic value. Present that task to Charlie and me 
separately, and you will get two different answers. Precision just isn't possible. 

To eliminate subjectivity, we therefore use an understated proxy for intrinsic-value - book value - 
when measuring our performance. To be sure, some of our businesses are worth far more than their carrying 
value on our books. (Later in this report, we'll present a case study.) But since that premium seldom swings 
wildly from year to year, book value can serve as a reasonable device for tracking how we are doing. 

The table on page 2 shows our 46-year record against the S&P, a performance quite good in the earlier 
years and now only satisfactory. The bountiful years, we want to emphasize, will never return. The huge sums of 
capital we currently manage eliminate any chance of exceptional performance. We will strive, however, for 
better-than-average results and feel it fair for you to hold us to that standard. 

Yearly figures, it should be noted, are neither to be ignored nor viewed as all-important. The pace of 
the earth's movement around the sun is not synchronized with the time required for either investment ideas or 
operating decisions to bear fruit. At GEICO, for example, we enthusiastically spent $900 million last year on 
advertising to obtain policyholders who deliver us no immediate profits. If we could spend twice that amount 
productively, we would happily do so though short-term results would be further penalized. Many large 
investments at our railroad and utility operations are also made with an eye to payoffs well down the road. 

To provide you a longer-term perspective on performance, we present on the facing page the yearly 
figures from page 2 recast into a series of five-year periods. Overall, there are 42 of these periods, and they tell 
an interesting story. On a comparative basis, our best years ended in the early 1980s. The market's golden period, 
however, came in the 17 following years, with Berkshire achieving stellar absolute returns even as our relative 
advantage narrowed. 

After 1999, the market stalled (or have you already noticed that?). Consequently, the satisfactory 
performance relative to the S&P that Berkshire has achieved since then has delivered only moderate absolute 
results. 

Looking forward, we hope to average several points better than the S&P - though that result is, of 
course, far from a sure thing. If we succeed in that aim, we will almost certainly produce better relative results in 
bad years for the stock market and suffer poorer results in strong markets. 


4 


Berkshire's Corporate Performance vs. the S&P 500 by Five- Year Periods 


Annual Percentage Change 

in Per-Share in S&P 500 
Book Value of with Dividends Relative 

Berkshire Included Results 

Five- Year Period (1) (2) (l)-(2) 

1965- 1969 17.2 5.0 12.2 

1966- 1970 14.7 3.9 10.8 

1967- 1971 13.9 9.2 4.7 

1968- 1972 16.8 7.5 9.3 

1969- 1973 17.7 2.0 15.7 

1970- 1974 15.0 (2.4) 17.4 

1971- 1975 13.9 3.2 10.7 

1972- 1976 20.8 4.9 15.9 

1973- 1977 23.4 (0.2) 23.6 

1974- 1978 24.4 4.3 20.1 

1975- 1979 30.1 14.7 15.4 

1976- 1980 33.4 13.9 19.5 

1977- 1981 29.0 8.1 20.9 

1978- 1982 29.9 14.1 15.8 

1979- 1983 31.6 17.3 14.3 

1980- 1984 27.0 14.8 12.2 

1981- 1985 32.6 14.6 18.0 

1982- 1986 31.5 19.8 11.7 

1983- 1987 27.4 16.4 11.0 

1984- 1988 25.0 15.2 9.8 

1985- 1989 31.1 20.3 10.8 

1986- 1990 22.9 13.1 9.8 

1987- 1991 25.4 15.3 10.1 

1988- 1992 25.6 15.8 9.8 

1989- 1993 24.4 14.5 9.9 

1990- 1994 18.6 8.7 9.9 

1991- 1995 25.6 16.5 9.1 

1992- 1996 24.2 15.2 9.0 

1993- 1997 26.9 20.2 6.7 

1994- 1998 33.7 24.0 9.7 

1995- 1999 30.4 28.5 1.9 

1996- 2000 22.9 18.3 4.6 

1997- 2001 14.8 10.7 4.1 

1998- 2002 10.4 (0.6) 11.0 

1999- 2003 6.0 (0.6) 6.6 

2000- 2004 8.0 (2.3) 10.3 

2001- 2005 8.0 0.6 7.4 

2002- 2006 13.1 6.2 6.9 

2003- 2007 13.3 12.8 0.5 

2004- 2008 6.9 (2.2) 9.1 

2005- 2009 8.6 0.4 8.2 

2006- 2010 10.0 2.3 7.7 

Notes: The first two periods cover the five years beginning September 30 of the previous year. The third period covers 
63 months beginning September 30, 1966 to December 31, 1971. All other periods involve calendar years. 

The other notes on page 2 also apply to this table. 


5 


Intrinsic Value - Today and Tomorrow 


Though Berkshire's intrinsic value cannot be precisely calculated, two of its three key pillars can be 
measured. Charlie and I rely heavily on these measurements when we make our own estimates of Berkshire's 
value. 

The first component of value is our investments: stocks, bonds and cash equivalents. At yearend these 
totaled $158 billion at market value. 

Insurance float - money we temporarily hold in our insurance operations that does not belong to us - 
funds $66 billion of our investments. This float is "free" as long as insurance underwriting breaks even, meaning 
that the premiums we receive equal the losses and expenses we incur. Of course, underwriting results are volatile, 
swinging erratically between profits and losses. Over our entire history, though, we've been significantly 
profitable, and I also expect us to average breakeven results or better in the future. If we do that, all of our 
investments - those funded both by float and by retained earnings - can be viewed as an element of value for 
Berkshire shareholders. 

Berkshire's second component of value is earnings that come from sources other than investments and 
insurance underwriting. These earnings are delivered by our 68 non-insurance companies, itemized on page 106. 
In Berkshire's early years, we focused on the investment side. During the past two decades, however, we've 
increasingly emphasized the development of earnings from non-insurance businesses, a practice that will 
continue. 

The following tables illustrate this shift. In the first table, we present per-share investments at decade 
intervals beginning in 1970, three years after we entered the insurance business. We exclude those investments 
applicable to minority interests. 


Per-Share Compounded Annual Increase 

Yearend Investments Period in Per-Share Investments 

1970 $ 66 

1980 754 1970-1980 27.5% 

1990 7,798 1980-1990 26.3% 

2000 50,229 1990-2000 20.5% 

2010 94,730 2000-2010 6.6% 


Though our compounded annual increase in per-share investments was a healthy 19.9% over the 
40-year period, our rate of increase has slowed sharply as we have focused on using funds to buy operating 
businesses. 

The payoff from this shift is shown in the following table, which illustrates how earnings of our 
non-insurance businesses have increased, again on a per-share basis and after applicable minority interests. 


Per-Share Compounded Annual Increase in 

Year Pre-Tax Earnings Period Per-Share Pre-Tax Earnings 

1970 $ 2.87 

1980 19.01 1970-1980 20.8% 

1990 102.58 1980-1990 18.4% 

2000 918.66 1990-2000 24.5% 

2010 5,926.04 2000-2010 20.5% 


6 


For the forty years, our compounded annual gain in pre-tax, non-insurance earnings per share is 21.0%. 
During the same period, Berkshire's stock price increased at a rate of 22.1% annually. Over time, you can expect 
our stock price to move in rough tandem with Berkshire's investments and earnings. Market price and intrinsic 
value often follow very different paths - sometimes for extended periods - but eventually they meet. 

There is a third, more subjective, element to an intrinsic value calculation that can be either positive or 
negative: the efficacy with which retained earnings will be deployed in the future. We, as well as many other 
businesses, are likely to retain earnings over the next decade that will equal, or even exceed, the capital we presently 
employ. Some companies will turn these retained dollars into fifty-cent pieces, others into two-dollar bills. 

This "what-will-they-do-with-the-money" factor must always be evaluated along with the 
"what-do-we-have-now" calculation in order for us, or anybody, to arrive at a sensible estimate of a company's 
intrinsic value. That's because an outside investor stands by helplessly as management reinvests his share of the 
company's earnings. If a CEO can be expected to do this job well, the reinvestment prospects add to the 
company's current value; if the CEO's talents or motives are suspect, today's value must be discounted. The 
difference in outcome can be huge. A dollar of then-value in the hands of Sears Roebuck's or Montgomery 
Ward's CEOs in the late 1960s had a far different destiny than did a dollar entrusted to Sam Walton. 

Charlie and I hope that the per-share earnings of our non-insurance businesses continue to increase at a 
decent rate. But the job gets tougher as the numbers get larger. We will need both good performance from our 
current businesses and more major acquisitions. We're prepared. Our elephant gun has been reloaded, and my 
trigger finger is itchy. 

Partially offsetting our anchor of size are several important advantages we have. First, we possess a 
cadre of truly skilled managers who have an unusual commitment to their own operations and to Berkshire. 
Many of our CEOs are independently wealthy and work only because they love what they do. They are 
volunteers, not mercenaries. Because no one can offer them a job they would enjoy more, they can't be lured 
away. 

At Berkshire, managers can focus on running their businesses: They are not subjected to meetings at 
headquarters nor financing worries nor Wall Street harassment. They simply get a letter from me every two years 
(it's reproduced on pages 104-105) and call me when they wish. And their wishes do differ: There are managers 
to whom I have not talked in the last year, while there is one with whom I talk almost daily. Our trust is in people 
rather than process. A "hire well, manage little" code suits both them and me. 

Berkshire's CEOs come in many forms. Some have MB As; others never finished college. Some use 
budgets and are by-the-book types; others operate by the seat of their pants. Our team resembles a baseball squad 
composed of all-stars having vastly different batting styles. Changes in our line-up are seldom required. 

Our second advantage relates to the allocation of the money our businesses earn. After meeting the 
needs of those businesses, we have very substantial sums left over. Most companies limit themselves to 
reinvesting funds within the industry in which they have been operating. That often restricts them, however, to a 
"universe" for capital allocation that is both tiny and quite inferior to what is available in the wider world. 
Competition for the few opportunities that are available tends to become fierce. The seller has the upper hand, as 
a girl might if she were the only female at a party attended by many boys. That lopsided situation would be great 
for the girl, but terrible for the boys. 

At Berkshire we face no institutional restraints when we deploy capital. Charlie and I are limited only 
by our ability to understand the likely future of a possible acquisition. If we clear that hurdle - and frequently we 
can't - we are then able to compare any one opportunity against a host of others. 


7 


When I took control of Berkshire in 1965, I didn't exploit this advantage. Berkshire was then only in 
textiles, where it had in the previous decade lost significant money. The dumbest thing I could have done was to 
pursue "opportunities" to improve and expand the existing textile operation - so for years that's exactly what I 
did. And then, in a final burst of brilliance, I went out and bought another textile company. Aaaaaaargh! 
Eventually I came to my senses, heading first into insurance and then into other industries. 

There is even a supplement to this world-is-our-oyster advantage: In addition to evaluating the 
attractions of one business against a host of others, we also measure businesses against opportunities available in 
marketable securities, a comparison most managements don't make. Often, businesses are priced ridiculously 
high against what can likely be earned from investments in stocks or bonds. At such moments, we buy securities 
and bide our time. 

Our flexibility in respect to capital allocation has accounted for much of our progress to date. We have 
been able to take money we earn from, say, See's Candies or Business Wire (two of our best-run businesses, but 
also two offering limited reinvestment opportunities) and use it as part of the stake we needed to buy BNSF. 

Our final advantage is the hard-to-duplicate culture that permeates Berkshire. And in businesses, 
culture counts. 

To start with, the directors who represent you think and act like owners. They receive token 
compensation: no options, no restricted stock and, for that matter, virtually no cash. We do not provide them 
directors and officers liability insurance, a given at almost every other large public company. If they mess up 
with your money, they will lose their money as well. Leaving my holdings aside, directors and their families own 
Berkshire shares worth more than $3 billion. Our directors, therefore, monitor Berkshire's actions and results 
with keen interest and an owner's eye. You and I are lucky to have them as stewards. 

This same owner-orientation prevails among our managers. In many cases, these are people who have 
sought out Berkshire as an acquirer for a business that they and their families have long owned. They came to us 
with an owner's mindset, and we provide an environment that encourages them to retain it. Having managers 
who love their businesses is no small advantage. 

Cultures self-propagate. Winston Churchill once said, "You shape your houses and then they shape 
you." That wisdom applies to businesses as well. Bureaucratic procedures beget more bureaucracy, and imperial 
corporate palaces induce imperious behavior. (As one wag put it, "You know you're no longer CEO when you 
get in the back seat of your car and it doesn't move.") At Berkshire's "World Headquarters" our annual rent is 
$270,212. Moreover, the home-office investment in furniture, art, Coke dispenser, lunch room, high-tech 
equipment - you name it - totals $301,363. As long as Charlie and I treat your money as if it were our own, 
Berkshire's managers are likely to be careful with it as well. 

Our compensation programs, our annual meeting and even our annual reports are all designed with an 
eye to reinforcing the Berkshire culture, and making it one that will repel and expel managers of a different bent. 
This culture grows stronger every year, and it will remain intact long after Charlie and I have left the scene. 

We will need all of the strengths I've just described to do reasonably well. Our managers will deliver; 
you can count on that. But whether Charlie and I can hold up our end in capital allocation depends in part on the 
competitive environment for acquisitions. You will get our best efforts. 

GEICO 

Now let me tell you a story that will help you understand how the intrinsic value of a business can far 
exceed its book value. Relating this tale also gives me a chance to relive some great memories. 

Sixty years ago last month, GEICO entered my life, destined to shape it in a huge way. I was then a 
20-year-old graduate student at Columbia, having elected to go there because my hero, Ben Graham, taught a 
once-a-week class at the school. 


8 


One day at the library, I checked out Ben's entry in Who's Who in America and found he was 
chairman of Government Employees Insurance Co. (now called GEICO). I knew nothing of insurance and had 
never heard of the company. The librarian, however, steered me to a large compendium of insurers and, after 
reading the page on GEICO, I decided to visit the company. The following Saturday, I boarded an early train for 
Washington. 

Alas, when I arrived at the company's headquarters, the building was closed. I then rather frantically 
started pounding on a door, until finally a janitor appeared. I asked him if there was anyone in the office I could 
talk to, and he steered me to the only person around, Lorimer Davidson. 

That was my lucky moment. During the next four hours, "Davy" gave me an education about both 
insurance and GEICO. It was the beginning of a wonderful friendship. Soon thereafter, I graduated from 
Columbia and became a stock salesman in Omaha. GEICO, of course, was my prime recommendation, which got 
me off to a great start with dozens of customers. GEICO also jump-started my net worth because, soon after 
meeting Davy, I made the stock 75% of my $9,800 investment portfolio. (Even so, I felt over-diversified.) 

Subsequently, Davy became CEO of GEICO, taking the company to undreamed-of heights before it got 
into trouble in the mid-1970s, a few years after his retirement. When that happened - with the stock falling by 
more than 95% - Berkshire bought about one-third of the company in the market, a position that over the years 
increased to 50% because of GEICO's repurchases of its own shares. Berkshire's cost for this half of the business 
was $46 million. (Despite the size of our position, we exercised no control over operations.) 

We then purchased the remaining 50% of GEICO at the beginning of 1996, which spurred Davy, at 95, 
to make a video tape saying how happy he was that his beloved GEICO would permanently reside with 
Berkshire. (He also playfully concluded with, "Next time, Warren, please make an appointment.") 

A lot has happened at GEICO during the last 60 years, but its core goal - saving Americans substantial 
money on their purchase of auto insurance - remains unchanged. (Try us at 1-800-847-7536 or 
www.GEICO.com.) In other words, get the policyholder's business by deserving his business. Focusing on this 
objective, the company has grown to be America's third-largest auto insurer, with a market share of 8.8%. 

When Tony Nicely, GEICO's CEO, took over in 1993, that share was 2.0%, a level at which it had 
been stuck for more than a decade. GEICO became a different company under Tony, finding a path to consistent 
growth while simultaneously maintaining underwriting discipline and keeping its costs low. 

Let me quantify Tony's achievement. When, in 1996, we bought the 50% of GEICO we didn't already 
own, it cost us about $2.3 billion. That price implied a value of $4.6 billion for 100%. GEICO then had tangible 
net worth of $1.9 billion. 

The excess over tangible net worth of the implied value - $2.7 billion - was what we estimated 
GEICO's "goodwill" to be worth at that time. That goodwill represented the economic value of the policyholders 
who were then doing business with GEICO. In 1995, those customers had paid the company $2.8 billion in 
premiums. Consequently, we were valuing GEICO's customers at about 97% (2.7/2.8) of what they were 
annually paying the company. By industry standards, that was a very high price. But GEICO was no ordinary 
insurer: Because of the company's low costs, its policyholders were consistently profitable and unusually loyal. 

Today, premium volume is $14.3 billion and growing. Yet we carry the goodwill of GEICO on our 
books at only $1.4 billion, an amount that will remain unchanged no matter how much the value of GEICO 
increases. (Under accounting rules, you write down the carrying value of goodwill if its economic value 
decreases, but leave it unchanged if economic value increases.) Using the 97% -of-premium- volume yardstick we 
applied to our 1996 purchase, the real value today of GEICO's economic goodwill is about $14 billion. And this 
value is likely to be much higher ten and twenty years from now. GEICO - off to a strong start in 2011 - is the 
gift that keeps giving. 


9 


One not-so-small footnote: Under Tony, GEICO has developed one of the country's largest personal- 
lines insurance agencies, which primarily sells homeowners policies to our GEICO auto insurance customers. In 
this business, we represent a number of insurers that are not affiliated with us. They take the risk; we simply sign 
up the customers. Last year we sold 769,898 new policies at this agency operation, up 34% from the year before. 
The obvious way this activity aids us is that it produces commission revenue; equally important is the fact that it 
further strengthens our relationship with our policyholders, helping us retain them. 

I owe an enormous debt to Tony and Davy (and, come to think of it, to that janitor as well). 

Now, let's examine the four major sectors of Berkshire. Each has vastly different balance sheet and 
income characteristics from the others. Lumping them together therefore impedes analysis. So we'll present them 
as four separate businesses, which is how Charlie and I view them. 

We will look first at insurance, Berkshire's core operation and the engine that has propelled our 
expansion over the years. 

Insurance 

Property-casualty ("P/C") insurers receive premiums upfront and pay claims later. In extreme cases, 
such as those arising from certain workers' compensation accidents, payments can stretch over decades. This 
collect-now, pay-later model leaves us holding large sums - money we call "float" - that will eventually go to 
others. Meanwhile, we get to invest this float for Berkshire's benefit. Though individual policies and claims 
come and go, the amount of float we hold remains remarkably stable in relation to premium volume. 
Consequently, as our business grows, so does our float. And how we have grown: Just take a look at the 
following table: 


Float 

Yearend (in $ millions) 

1970 $ 39 

1980 237 

1990 1,632 

2000 27,871 

2010 65,832 


If our premiums exceed the total of our expenses and eventual losses, we register an underwriting profit 
that adds to the investment income that our float produces. When such a profit occurs, we enjoy the use of free 
money - and, better yet, get paid for holding it. Alas, the wish of all insurers to achieve this happy result creates 
intense competition, so vigorous in most years that it causes the P/C industry as a whole to operate at a 
significant underwriting loss. This loss, in effect, is what the industry pays to hold its float. For example, State 
Farm, by far the country's largest insurer and a well-managed company, has incurred an underwriting loss in 
seven of the last ten years. During that period, its aggregate underwriting loss was more than $20 billion. 

At Berkshire, we have now operated at an underwriting profit for eight consecutive years, our total 
underwriting gain for the period having been $17 billion. I believe it likely that we will continue to underwrite 
profitably in most - though certainly not all - future years. If we accomplish that, our float will be better than 
cost-free. We will benefit just as we would if some party deposited $66 billion with us, paid us a fee for holding 
its money and then let us invest its funds for our own benefit. 


10 


Let me emphasize again that cost-free float is not an outcome to be expected for the P/C industry as a 
whole: In most years, industry premiums have been inadequate to cover claims plus expenses. Consequently, the 
industry's overall return on tangible equity has for many decades fallen far short of the average return realized by 
American industry, a sorry performance almost certain to continue. Berkshire's outstanding economics exist only 
because we have some terrific managers running some unusual businesses. We've already told you about GEICO, 
but we have two other very large operations, and a bevy of smaller ones as well, each a star in its own way. 

First off is the Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group, run by Ajit Jain. Ajit insures risks that no one 
else has the desire or the capital to take on. His operation combines capacity, speed, decisiveness and, most 
importantly, brains in a manner that is unique in the insurance business. Yet he never exposes Berkshire to risks 
that are inappropriate in relation to our resources. Indeed, we are, far more conservative than most large insurers 
in that respect. In the past year, Ajit has significantly increased his life reinsurance operation, developing annual 
premium volume of about $2 billion that will repeat for decades. 

From a standing start in 1985, Ajit has created an insurance business with float of $30 billion and 
significant underwriting profits, a feat that no CEO of any other insurer has come close to matching. By his 
accomplishments, he has added a great many billions of dollars to the value of Berkshire. Even kryptonite 
bounces off Ajit. 

We have another insurance powerhouse in General Re, managed by Tad Montross. 

At bottom, a sound insurance operation requires four disciplines: (1) An understanding of all exposures 
that might cause a policy to incur losses; (2) A conservative evaluation of the likelihood of any exposure actually 
causing a loss and the probable cost if it does; (3) The setting of a premium that will deliver a profit, on average, 
after both prospective loss costs and operating expenses are covered; and (4) The willingness to walk away if the 
appropriate premium can't be obtained. 

Many insurers pass the first three tests and flunk the fourth. The urgings of Wall Street, pressures from 
the agency force and brokers, or simply a refusal by a testosterone-driven CEO to accept shrinking volumes has 
led too many insurers to write business at inadequate prices. "The other guy is doing it so we must as well" spells 
trouble in any business, but none more so than insurance. 

Tad has observed all four of the insurance commandments, and it shows in his results. General Re's huge 
float has been better than cost-free under his leadership, and we expect that, on average, it will continue to be. 

Finally, we own a group of smaller companies, most of them specializing in odd corners of the 
insurance world. In aggregate, their results have consistently been profitable and, as the table below shows, the 
float they provide us is substantial. Charlie and I treasure these companies and their managers. 

Here is the record of all four segments of our property-casualty and life insurance businesses: 

Underwriting Profit Yearend Float 


(in millions) 

Insurance Operations 2010 2009 2010 2009 

General Re $ 452 $ 477 $20,049 $21,014 

BH Reinsurance 176 250 30,370 27,753 

GEICO 1,117 649 10,272 9,613 

Other Primary 268 84 5,141 5,061 

$2,013 $1,460 $65,832 $63,441 


Among large insurance operations, Berkshire's impresses me as the best in the world. 


11 


Manufacturing, Service and Retailing Operations 


Our activities in this part of Berkshire cover the waterfront. Let's look, though, at a summary balance 
sheet and earnings statement for the entire group. 

Balance Sheet 12/31/10 (in millions) 


Assets 

Cash and equivalents $ 2,673 

Accounts and notes receivable 5,396 

Inventory 7,101 

Other current assets 550 

Total current assets 15,720 

Goodwill and other intangibles 16,976 

Fixed assets 15,421 

Other assets 3,029 

$51,146 


Liabilities and Equity 

Notes payable 7. $ 1,805 

Other current liabilities 8,169 

Total current liabilities 9,974 

Deferred taxes 3,001 

Term debt and other liabilities 6,621 

Equity 31,550 

$51,146 


Earnings Statement ( in millions ) 

2010 2009 2008 


Revenues $66,610 $61,665 $66,099 

Operating expenses (including depreciation of $1,362 in 2010, $1,422 in 2009 

and $1,280 in 2008) 62,225 59,509 61,937 

Interest expense Ill 98 139 

Pre-tax earnings 4,274* 2,058* 4,023* 

Income taxes and non-controlling interests 1,812 945 1,740 

Net earnings $ 2,462 $ 1,113 $ 2,283 


*Does not include purchase-accounting adjustments. 

This group of companies sells products ranging from lollipops to jet airplanes. Some of the businesses 
enjoy terrific economics, measured by earnings on unleveraged net tangible assets that run from 25% after-tax to 
more than 100%. Others produce good returns in the area of 12-20%. Unfortunately, a few have very poor 
returns, a result of some serious mistakes I have made in my job of capital allocation. These errors came about 
because I misjudged either the competitive strength of the business I was purchasing or the future economics of 
the industry in which it operated. I try to look out ten or twenty years when making an acquisition, but sometimes 
my eyesight has been poor. 

Most of the companies in this section improved their earnings last year and four set records. Let's look 
first at the record-breakers. 

• TTI, our electronic components distributor, had sales 21% above its previous high (recorded in 2008) 
and pre-tax earnings that topped its earlier record by 58%. Its sales gains spanned three continents, with 
North America at 16%, Europe at 26%, and Asia at 50%. The thousands of items TTI distributes are 
pedestrian, many selling for less than a dollar. The magic of TTI's exceptional performance is created 
by Paul Andrews, its CEO, and his associates. 


12 


• Forest River, our RV and boat manufacturer, had record sales of nearly $2 billion and record earnings 
as well. Forest River has 82 plants, and I have yet to visit one (or the home office, for that matter). 
There's no need; Pete Liegl, the company's CEO, runs a terrific operation. Come view his products at 
the annual meeting. Better yet, buy one. 

• CTB, our farm-equipment company, again set an earnings record. I told you in the 2008 Annual Report 
about Vic Mancinelli, the company's CEO. He just keeps getting better. Berkshire paid $140 million 
for CTB in 2002. It has since paid us dividends of $160 million and eliminated $40 million of debt. 
Last year it earned $106 million pre-tax. Productivity gains have produced much of this increase. When 
we bought CTB, sales per employee were $189,365; now they are $405,878. 

• Would you believe shoes? H. H. Brown, run by Jim Issler and best known for its Born brand, set a new 
record for sales and earnings (helped by its selling 1,110 pairs of shoes at our annual meeting). Jim has 
brilliantly adapted to major industry changes. His work, I should mention, is overseen by Frank 
Rooney, 89, a superb businessman and still a dangerous fellow with whom to have a bet on the golf 
course. 

A huge story in this sector's year-to-year improvement occurred at NetJets. I can't overstate the 
breadth and importance of Dave Sokol's achievements at this company, the leading provider of fractional 
ownership of jet airplanes. NetJets has long been an operational success, owning a 2010 market share five times 
that of its nearest competitor. Our overwhelming leadership stems from a wonderful team of pilots, mechanics 
and service personnel. This crew again did its job in 2010, with customer satisfaction, as delineated in our regular 
surveys, hitting new highs. 

Even though NetJets was consistently a runaway winner with customers, our financial results, since its 
acquisition in 1998, were a failure. In the 11 years through 2009, the company reported an aggregate pre-tax loss 
of $157 million, a figure that was far understated since borrowing costs at NetJets were heavily subsidized by its 
free use of Berkshire's credit. Had NetJets been operating on a stand-alone basis, its loss over the years would 
have been several hundreds of millions greater. 

We are now charging NetJets an appropriate fee for Berkshire's guarantee. Despite this fee (which 
came to $38 million in 2010), NetJets earned $207 million pre-tax in 2010, a swing of $918 million from 2009. 
Dave's quick restructuring of management and the company's rationalization of its purchasing and spending 
policies has ended the hemorrhaging of cash and turned what was Berkshire's only major business problem into a 
solidly profitable operation. 

Dave has meanwhile maintained NetJets' industry-leading reputation for safety and service. In many 
important ways, our training and operational standards are considerably stronger than those required by the FAA. 
Maintaining top-of-the-line standards is the right thing to do, but I also have a selfish reason for championing this 
policy. My family and I have flown more than 5,000 hours on NetJets (that's equal to being airborne 24 hours a 
day for seven months) and will fly thousands of hours more in the future. We receive no special treatment and 
have used a random mix of at least 100 planes and 300 crews. Whichever the plane or crew, we always know we 
are flying with the best-trained pilots in private aviation. 

The largest earner in our manufacturing, service and retailing sector is Marmon, a collection of 130 
businesses. We will soon increase our ownership in this company to 80% by carrying out our scheduled purchase 
of 17% of its stock from the Pritzker family. The cost will be about $1.5 billion. We will then purchase the 
remaining Pritzker holdings in 2013 or 2014, whichever date is selected by the family. Frank Ptak runs Marmon 
wonderfully, and we look forward to 100% ownership. 


13 


Next to Marmon, the two largest earners in this sector are Iscar and McLane. Both had excellent years. 
In 2010, Grady Rosier' s McLane entered the wine and spirits distribution business to supplement its $32 billion 
operation as a distributor of food products, cigarettes, candy and sundries. In purchasing Empire Distributors, an 
operator in Georgia and North Carolina, we teamed up with David Kahn, the company's dynamic CEO. David is 
leading our efforts to expand geographically. By yearend he had already made his first acquisition, Horizon Wine 
and Spirits in Tennessee. 

At Iscar, profits were up 159% in 2010, and we may well surpass pre-recession levels in 2011. Sales 
are improving throughout the world, particularly in Asia. Credit Eitan Wertheimer, Jacob Harpaz and Danny 
Goldman for an exceptional performance, one far superior to that of Iscar' s main competitors. 

All that is good news. Our businesses related to home construction, however, continue to struggle. 
Johns Manville, MiTek, Shaw and Acme Brick have maintained their competitive positions, but their profits are 
far below the levels of a few years ago. Combined, these operations earned $362 million pre-tax in 2010 
compared to $1.3 billion in 2006, and their employment has fallen by about 9,400. 

A housing recovery will probably begin within a year or so. In any event, it is certain to occur at some 
point. Consequently: (1) At MiTek, we have made, or committed to, five bolt-on acquisitions during the past 
eleven months; (2) At Acme, we just recently acquired the leading manufacturer of brick in Alabama for 
$50 million; (3) Johns Manville is building a $55 million roofing membrane plant in Ohio, to be completed next 
year; and (4) Shaw will spend $200 million in 2011 on plant and equipment, all of it situated in America. These 
businesses entered the recession strong and will exit it stronger. At Berkshire, our time horizon is forever. 

Regulated, Capital-intensive Businesses 

We have two very large businesses, BNSF and MidAmerican Energy, with important common 
characteristics that distinguish them from our many others. Consequently, we give them their own sector in this 
letter and split out their financial statistics in our GAAP balance sheet and income statement. 

A key characteristic of both companies is the huge investment they have in very long-lived, regulated 
assets, with these funded by large amounts of long-term debt that is not guaranteed by Berkshire. Our credit is 
not needed: Both businesses have earning power that, even under very adverse business conditions, amply covers 
their interest requirements. For example, in recessionary 2010 with BNSF's car loadings far off peak levels, the 
company's interest coverage was 6:1. 

Both companies are heavily regulated, and both will have a never-ending need to make major 
investments in plant and equipment. Both also need to provide efficient, customer-satisfying service to earn the 
respect of their communities and regulators. In return, both need to be assured that they will be allowed to earn 
reasonable earnings on future capital investments. 

Earlier I explained just how important railroads are to our country's future. Rail moves 42% of 
America's inter-city freight, measured by ton-miles, and BNSF moves more than any other railroad - about 28% 
of the industry total. A little math will tell you that more than 11% of all inter-city ton-miles of freight in the U.S. 
is transported by BNSF. Given the shift of population to the West, our share may well inch higher. 

All of this adds up to a huge responsibility. We are a major and essential part of the American 
economy's circulatory system, obliged to constantly maintain and improve our 23,000 miles of track along with 
its ancillary bridges, tunnels, engines and cars. In carrying out this job, we must anticipate society's needs, not 
merely react to them. Fulfilling our societal obligation, we will regularly spend far more than our depreciation, 
with this excess amounting to $2 billion in 2011. I'm confident we will earn appropriate returns on our huge 
incremental investments. Wise regulation and wise investment are two sides of the same coin. 

At MidAmerican, we participate in a similar "social compact." We are expected to put up ever- 
increasing sums to satisfy the future needs of our customers. If we meanwhile operate reliably and efficiently, we 
know that we will obtain a fair return on these investments. 


14 


MidAmerican supplies 2.4 million customers in the U.S. with electricity, operating as the largest 
supplier in Iowa, Wyoming and Utah and as an important provider in other states as well. Our pipelines transport 
8% of the country's natural gas. Obviously, many millions of Americans depend on us every day. 

MidAmerican has delivered outstanding results for both its owners (Berkshire's interest is 89.8%) and its 
customers. Shortly after MidAmerican purchased Northern Natural Gas pipeline in 2002, that company's 
performance as a pipeline was rated dead last, 43 out of 43, by the leading authority in the field. In the most recent 
report published, Northern Natural was ranked second. The top spot was held by our other pipeline, Kern River. 

In its electric business, MidAmerican has a comparable record. Iowa rates have not increased since we 
purchased our operation there in 1999. During the same period, the other major electric utility in the state has 
raised prices more than 70% and now has rates far above ours. In certain metropolitan areas in which the two 
utilities operate side by side, electric bills of our customers run far below those of their neighbors. I am told that 
comparable houses sell at higher prices in these cities if they are located in our service area. 

MidAmerican will have 2,909 megawatts of wind generation in operation by the end of 2011, more 
than any other regulated electric utility in the country. The total amount that MidAmerican has invested or 
committed to wind is a staggering $5.4 billion. We can make this sort of investment because MidAmerican 
retains all of its earnings, unlike other utilities that generally pay out most of what they earn. 

As you can tell by now, I am proud of what has been accomplished for our society by Matt Rose at 
BNSF and by David Sokol and Greg Abel at MidAmerican. I am also both proud and grateful for what they have 
accomplished for Berkshire shareholders. Below are the relevant figures: 


MidAmerican Earnings ( in millions ) 

2010 2009 

U.K. utilities $ 333 $ 248 

Iowa utility 279 285 

Western utilities 783 788 

Pipelines 378 457 

HomeServices 42 43 

Other (net) 47 25 

Operating earnings before corporate interest and taxes 1,862 1,846 

Interest, other than to Berkshire (323) (318) 

Interest on Berkshire junior debt (30) (58) 

Income tax (271) (313) 

Net earnings $1,238 $1,157 


Earnings applicable to Berkshire* $1,131 $1,071 


* Includes interest earned by Berkshire (net of related income taxes) of $19 in 2010 and $38 in 2009. 
BNSF 


(Historical accounting through 2/12/10; purchase accounting subsequently) (in millions) 

2010 2009 

Revenues $16,850 $14,016 

Operating earnings 4,495 3,254 

Interest (Net) 507 613 

Pre-Tax earnings 3,988 2,641 

Net earnings 2,459 1,721 


15 


Finance and Financial Products 

This, our smallest sector, includes two rental companies, XTRA (trailers) and CORT (furniture), and 
Clayton Homes, the country's leading producer and financer of manufactured homes. 

Both of our leasing businesses improved their performances last year, albeit from a very low base. 
XTRA increased the utilization of its equipment from 63% in 2009 to 75% in 2010, thereby raising pre-tax 
earnings to $35 million from $17 million in 2009. CORT experienced a pickup in business as the year progressed 
and also significantly tightened its operations. The combination increased its pre-tax results from a loss of 
$3 million in 2009 to $18 million of profit in 2010. 

At Clayton, we produced 23,343 homes, 47% of the industry's total of 50,046. Contrast this to the peak 
year of 1998, when 372,843 homes were manufactured. (We then had an industry share of 8%.) Sales would have 
been terrible last year under any circumstances, but the financing problems I commented upon in the 2009 report 
continue to exacerbate the distress. To explain: Home-financing policies of our government, expressed through 
the loans found acceptable by FHA, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, favor site-built homes and work to negate the 
price advantage that manufactured homes offer. 

We finance more manufactured-home buyers than any other company. Our experience, therefore, 
should be instructive to those parties preparing to overhaul our country's home-loan practices. Let's take a look. 

Clayton owns 200,804 mortgages that it originated. (It also has some mortgage portfolios that it 
purchased.) At the origination of these contracts, the average FICO score of our borrowers was 648, and 47% 
were 640 or below. Your banker will tell you that people with such scores are generally regarded as questionable 
credits. 

Nevertheless, our portfolio has performed well during conditions of stress. Here's our loss experience 
during the last five years for originated loans: 

Net Losses as a Percentage 


Year of Average Loans 

2006 1.53% 

2007 1.27% 

2008 1.17% 

2009 1.86% 

2010 1.72% 


Our borrowers get in trouble when they lose their jobs, have health problems, get divorced, etc. The 
recession has hit them hard. But they want to stay in their homes, and generally they borrowed sensible amounts 
in relation to their income. In addition, we were keeping the originated mortgages for our own account, which 
means we were not securitizing or otherwise reselling them. If we were stupid in our lending, we were going to 
pay the price. That concentrates the mind. 

If home buyers throughout the country had behaved like our buyers, America would not have had the 
crisis that it did. Our approach was simply to get a meaningful down-payment and gear fixed monthly payments 
to a sensible percentage of income. This policy kept Clayton solvent and also kept buyers in their homes. 

Home ownership makes sense for most Americans, particularly at today's lower prices and bargain 
interest rates. All things considered, the third best investment I ever made was the purchase of my home, though I 
would have made far more money had I instead rented and used the purchase money to buy stocks. (The two best 
investments were wedding rings.) For the $31,500 I paid for our house, my family and I gained 52 years of 
terrific memories with more to come. 


16 


But a house can be a nightmare if the buyer's eyes are bigger than his wallet and if a lender - often 
protected by a government guarantee - facilitates his fantasy. Our country's social goal should not be to put 
families into the house of their dreams, but rather to put them into a house they can afford. 

Investments 

Below we show our common stock investments that at yearend had a market value of more than 
$1 billion. 


12/31/10 


Shares 

Company 

Percentage of 
Company 
Owned 

Cost* 

Market 




(in millions) 

151,610,700 

American Express Company 

12.6 

$ 1,287 

$ 6,507 

225,000,000 

BYD Company, Ltd 

9.9 

232 

1,182 

900 OOO OOO 

i ne v^oca-v^oia v^-ompaiiy 

o.O 

1,299 

13,154 

29,109,637 

ConocoPhillips 

2.0 

2,028 

1,982 

45,022,563 

Johnson & Johnson 

1.6 

2,749 

2,785 

97,214,584 

Kraft Foods Inc 

5.6 

3,207 

3,063 

19,259,600 

Munich Re 

10.5 

2,896 

2,924 

3,947,555 

POSCO 

4.6 

768 

1,706 

72,391,036 

The Procter & Gamble Company 

2.6 

464 

4,657 

25,848,838 

Sanofi-Aventis 

2.0 

2,060 

1,656 

242,163,773 

Tesco pic 

3.0 

1,414 

1,608 

78,060,769 

U.S. Bancorp 

4.1 

2,401 

2,105 

39,037,142 

Wal-Mart Stores, Inc 

1.1 

1,893 

2,105 

358,936,125 

Wells Fargo & Company 

6.8 

8,015 

11,123 


Others 


3,020 

4,956 


Total Common Stocks Carried at Market 


$33,733 

$61,513 


*This is our actual purchase price and also our tax basis; GAAP "cost" differs in a few cases because of 
write-ups or write-downs that have been required. 

In our reported earnings we reflect only the dividends our portfolio companies pay us. Our share of the 
undistributed earnings of these investees, however, was more than $2 billion last year. These retained earnings 
are important. In our experience - and, for that matter, in the experience of investors over the past century - 
undistributed earnings have been either matched or exceeded by market gains, albeit in a highly irregular manner. 
(Indeed, sometimes the correlation goes in reverse. As one investor said in 2009: "This is worse than divorce. 
I've lost half my net worth - and I still have my wife.") In the future, we expect our market gains to eventually at 
least equal the earnings our investees retain. 

In our earlier estimate of Berkshire's normal earning power, we made three adjustments that relate to 
future investment income (but did not include anything for the undistributed earnings factor I have just 
described). 

The first adjustment was decidedly negative. Last year, we discussed five large fixed-income 
investments that have been contributing substantial sums to our reported earnings. One of these - our Swiss Re 
note - was redeemed in the early days of 2011, and two others - our Goldman Sachs and General Electric 
preferred stocks - are likely to be gone by yearend. General Electric is entitled to call our preferred in October 
and has stated its intention to do so. Goldman Sachs has the right to call our preferred on 30 days notice, but has 
been held back by the Federal Reserve (bless it!), which unfortunately will likely give Goldman the green light 
before long. 


17 


All three of the companies redeeming must pay us a premium to do so - in aggregate about $1.4 billion - 
but all of the redemptions are nevertheless unwelcome. After they occur, our earning power will be significantly 
reduced. That's the bad news. 

There are two probable offsets. At yearend we held $38 billion of cash equivalents that have been 
earning a pittance throughout 2010. At some point, however, better rates will return. They will add at least 
$500 million - and perhaps much more - to our investment income. That sort of increase in money-market yields 
is unlikely to come soon. It is appropriate, nevertheless, for us to include improved rates in an estimate of 
"normal" earning power. Even before higher rates come about, furthermore, we could get lucky and find an 
opportunity to use some of our cash hoard at decent returns. That day can't come too soon for me: To update 
Aesop, a girl in a convertible is worth five in the phone book. 

In addition, dividends on our current common stock holdings will almost certainly increase. The largest 
gain is likely to come at Wells Fargo. The Federal Reserve, our friend in respect to Goldman Sachs, has frozen 
dividend levels at major banks, whether strong or weak, during the last two years. Wells Fargo, though 
consistently prospering throughout the worst of the recession and currently enjoying enormous financial strength 
and earning power, has therefore been forced to maintain an artificially low payout. (We don't fault the Fed: For 
various reasons, an across-the-board freeze made sense during the crisis and its immediate aftermath.) 

At some point, probably soon, the Fed's restrictions will cease. Wells Fargo can then reinstate the 
rational dividend policy that its owners deserve. At that time, we would expect our annual dividends from just 
this one security to increase by several hundreds of millions of dollars annually. 

Other companies we hold are likely to increase their dividends as well. Coca-Cola paid us $88 million 
in 1995, the year after we finished purchasing the stock. Every year since, Coke has increased its dividend. In 
2011, we will almost certainly receive $376 million from Coke, up $24 million from last year. Within ten years, I 
would expect that $376 million to double. By the end of that period, I wouldn't be surprised to see our share of 
Coke's annual earnings exceed 100% of what we paid for the investment. Time is the friend of the wonderful 
business. 

Overall, I believe our "normal" investment income will at least equal what we realized in 2010, though 
the redemptions I described will cut our take in 2011 and perhaps 2012 as well. 

Last summer, Lou Simpson told me he wished to retire. Since Lou was a mere 74 - an age Charlie and 
I regard as appropriate only for trainees at Berkshire - his call was a surprise. 

Lou joined GEICO as its investment manager in 1979, and his service to that company has been 
invaluable. In the 2004 Annual Report, I detailed his record with equities, and I have omitted updates only 
because his performance made mine look bad. Who needs that? 

Lou has never been one to advertise his talents. But I will: Simply put, Lou is one of the investment 
greats. We will miss him. 

Four years ago, I told you that we needed to add one or more younger investment managers to carry on 
when Charlie, Lou and I weren't around. At that time we had multiple outstanding candidates immediately 
available for my CEO job (as we do now), but we did not have backup in the investment area. 

It's easy to identify many investment managers with great recent records. But past results, though 
important, do not suffice when prospective performance is being judged. How the record has been achieved is 
crucial, as is the manager's understanding of - and sensitivity to - risk (which in no way should be measured by 
beta, the choice of too many academics). In respect to the risk criterion, we were looking for someone with a 
hard-to-evaluate skill: the ability to anticipate the effects of economic scenarios not previously observed. Finally, 
we wanted someone who would regard working for Berkshire as far more than a job. 


18 


When Charlie and I met Todd Combs, we knew he fit our requirements. Todd, as was the case with 
Lou, will be paid a salary plus a contingent payment based on his performance relative to the S&P. We have 
arrangements in place for deferrals and carryforwards that will prevent see-saw performance being met by 
undeserved payments. The hedge-fund world has witnessed some terrible behavior by general partners who have 
received huge payouts on the upside and who then, when bad results occurred, have walked away rich, with their 
limited partners losing back their earlier gains. Sometimes these same general partners thereafter quickly started 
another fund so that they could immediately participate in future profits without having to overcome their past 
losses. Investors who put money with such managers should be labeled patsies, not partners. 

As long as I am CEO, I will continue to manage the great majority of Berkshire's holdings, both bonds 
and equities. Todd initially will manage funds in the range of one to three billion dollars, an amount he can reset 
annually. His focus will be equities but he is not restricted to that form of investment. (Fund consultants like to 
require style boxes such as "long-short," "macro," "international equities." At Berkshire our only style box is 
"smart.") 

Over time, we may add one or two investment managers if we find the right individuals. Should we do 
that, we will probably have 80% of each manager's performance compensation be dependent on his or her own 
portfolio and 20% on that of the other manager(s). We want a compensation system that pays off big for 
individual success but that also fosters cooperation, not competition. 

When Charlie and I are no longer around, our investment manager(s) will have responsibility for the 
entire portfolio in a manner then set by the CEO and Board of Directors. Because good investors bring a useful 
perspective to the purchase of businesses, we would expect them to be consulted - but not to have a vote - on the 
wisdom of possible acquisitions. In the end, of course, the Board will make the call on any major acquisition. 

One footnote: When we issued a press release about Todd's joining us, a number of commentators 
pointed out that he was "little-known" and expressed puzzlement that we didn't seek a "big-name." I wonder 
how many of them would have known of Lou in 1979, Ajit in 1985, or, for that matter, Charlie in 1959. Our goal 
was to find a 2-year-old Secretariat, not a 10-year-old Seabiscuit. (Whoops - that may not be the smartest 
metaphor for an 80-year-old CEO to use.) 

Derivatives 

Two years ago, in the 2008 Annual Report, I told you that Berkshire was a party to 251 derivatives 
contracts (other than those used for operations at our subsidiaries, such as MidAmerican, and the few left over at 
Gen Re). Today, the comparable number is 203, a figure reflecting both a few additions to our portfolio and the 
unwinding or expiration of some contracts. 

Our continuing positions, all of which I am personally responsible for, fall largely into two categories. 
We view both categories as engaging us in insurance-like activities in which we receive premiums for assuming 
risks that others wish to shed. Indeed, the thought processes we employ in these derivatives transactions are 
identical to those we use in our insurance business. You should also understand that we get paid up-front when 
we enter into the contracts and therefore run no counterparty risk. That's important. 

Our first category of derivatives consists of a number of contracts, written in 2004-2008, that required 
payments by us if there were bond defaults by companies included in certain high-yield indices. With minor 
exceptions, we were exposed to these risks for five years, with each contract covering 100 companies. 

In aggregate, we received premiums of $3.4 billion for these contracts. When I originally told you in 
our 2007 Annual Report about them, I said that I expected the contracts would deliver us an "underwriting 
profit," meaning that our losses would be less than the premiums we received. In addition, I said we would 
benefit from the use of float. 


19 


Subsequently, as you know too well, we encountered both a financial panic and a severe recession. A 
number of the companies in the high-yield indices failed, which required us to pay losses of $2.5 billion. Today, 
however, our exposure is largely behind us because most of our higher-risk contracts have expired. Consequently, it 
appears almost certain that we will earn an underwriting profit as we originally anticipated. In addition, we have had 
the use of interest-free float that averaged about $2 billion over the life of the contracts. In short, we charged the 
right premium, and that protected us when business conditions turned terrible three years ago. 

Our other large derivatives position - whose contracts go by the name of "equity puts" - involves 
insurance we wrote for parties wishing to protect themselves against a possible decline in equity prices in the 
U.S., U.K., Europe and Japan. These contracts are tied to various equity indices, such as the S&P 500 in the U.S. 
and the FTSE 100 in the U.K. In the 2004-2008 period, we received $4.8 billion of premiums for 47 of these 
contracts, most of which ran for 15 years. On these contracts, only the price of the indices on the termination date 
counts: No payments can be required before then. 

As a first step in updating you about these contracts, I can report that late in 2010, at the instigation of 
our counterparty, we unwound eight contracts, all of them due between 2021 and 2028. We had originally 
received $647 million in premiums for these contracts, and the unwinding required us to pay $425 million. 
Consequently, we realized a gain of $222 million and also had the interest-free and unrestricted use of that 
$647 million for about three years. 

Those 2010 transactions left us with 39 equity put contracts remaining on our books at yearend. On 
these, at their initiation, we received premiums of $4.2 billion. 

The future of these contracts is, of course, uncertain. But here is one perspective on them. If the prices 
of the relevant indices are the same at the contract expiration dates as these prices were on December 31, 2010 - 
and foreign exchange rates are unchanged - we would owe $3.8 billion on expirations occurring from 2018 to 
2026. You can call this amount "settlement value." 

On our yearend balance sheet, however, we carry the liability for those remaining equity puts at 
$6.7 billion. In other words, if the prices of the relevant indices remain unchanged from that date, we will record 
a $2.9 billion gain in the years to come, that being the difference between the liability figure of $6.7 billion and 
the settlement value of $3.8 billion. I believe that equity prices will very likely increase and that our liability will 
fall significantly between now and settlement date. If so, our gain from this point will be even greater. But that, 
of course, is far from a sure thing. 

What is sure is that we will have the use of our remaining "float" of $4.2 billion for an average of about 
10 more years. (Neither this float nor that arising from the high-yield contracts is included in the insurance float 
figure of $66 billion.) Since money is fungible, think of a portion of these funds as contributing to the purchase 
of BNSF. 

As I have told you before, almost all of our derivatives contracts are free of any obligation to post 
collateral - a fact that cut the premiums we could otherwise have charged. But that fact also left us feeling 
comfortable during the financial crisis, allowing us in those days to commit to some advantageous purchases. 
Foregoing some additional derivatives premiums proved to be well worth it. 

On Reporting and Misreporting: The Numbers That Count and Those That Don't 

Earlier in this letter, I pointed out some numbers that Charlie and I find useful in valuing Berkshire and 
measuring its progress. 

Let's focus here on a number we omitted, but which many in the media feature above all others: net 
income. Important though that number may be at most companies, it is almost always meaningless at Berkshire. 
Regardless of how our businesses might be doing, Charlie and I could - quite legally - cause net income in any 
given period to be almost any number we would like. 


20 


We have that flexibility because realized gains or losses on investments go into the net income figure, 
whereas unrealized gains (and, in most cases, losses) are excluded. For example, imagine that Berkshire had a 
$10 billion increase in unrealized gains in a given year and concurrently had $1 billion of realized losses. Our net 
income - which would count only the loss - would be reported as less than our operating income. If we had 
meanwhile realized gains in the previous year, headlines might proclaim that our earnings were down X% when 
in reality our business might be much improved. 

If we really thought net income important, we could regularly feed realized gains into it simply because 
we have a huge amount of unrealized gains upon which to draw. Rest assured, though, that Charlie and I have 
never sold a security because of the effect a sale would have on the net income we were soon to report. We both 
have a deep disgust for "game playing" with numbers, a practice that was rampant throughout corporate America 
in the 1990s and still persists, though it occurs less frequently and less blatantly than it used to. 

Operating earnings, despite having some shortcomings, are in general a reasonable guide as to how our 
businesses are doing. Ignore our net income figure, however. Regulations require that we report it to you. But if 
you find reporters focusing on it, that will speak more to their performance than ours. 

Both realized and unrealized gains and losses are fully reflected in the calculation of our book value. 
Pay attention to the changes in that metric and to the course of our operating earnings, and you will be on the 
right track. 

As a p.s., I can't resist pointing out just how capricious reported net income can be. Had our equity puts 
had a termination date of June 30, 2010, we would have been required to pay $6.4 billion to our counterparties at 
that date. Security prices then generally rose in the next quarter, a move that brought the corresponding figure 
down to $5.8 billion on September 30th. Yet the Black-Scholes formula that we use in valuing these contracts 
required us to increase our balance-sheet liability during this period from $8.9 billion to $9.6 billion, a change 
that, after the effect of tax accruals, reduced our net income for the quarter by $455 million. 

Both Charlie and I believe that Black-Scholes produces wildly inappropriate values when applied to 
long-dated options. We set out one absurd example in these pages two years ago. More tangibly, we put our 
money where our mouth was by entering into our equity put contracts. By doing so, we implicitly asserted that 
the Black-Scholes calculations used by our counterparties or their customers were faulty. 

We continue, nevertheless, to use that formula in presenting our financial statements. Black-Scholes is 
the accepted standard for option valuation - almost all leading business schools teach it - and we would be 
accused of shoddy accounting if we deviated from it. Moreover, we would present our auditors with an 
insurmountable problem were we to do that: They have clients who are our counterparties and who use Black- 
Scholes values for the same contracts we hold. It would be impossible for our auditors to attest to the accuracy of 
both their values and ours were the two far apart. 

Part of the appeal of Black-Scholes to auditors and regulators is that it produces a precise number. 
Charlie and I can't supply one of those. We believe the true liability of our contracts to be far lower than that 
calculated by Black-Scholes, but we can't come up with an exact figure - anymore than we can come up with a 
precise value for GEICO, BNSF, or for Berkshire Hathaway itself. Our inability to pinpoint a number doesn't 
bother us: We would rather be approximately right than precisely wrong. 

John Kenneth Galbraith once slyly observed that economists were most economical with ideas: They 
made the ones learned in graduate school last a lifetime. University finance departments often behave similarly. 
Witness the tenacity with which almost all clung to the theory of efficient markets throughout the 1970s and 
1980s, dismissively calling powerful facts that refuted it "anomalies." (I always love explanations of that kind: 
The Flat Earth Society probably views a ship's circling of the globe as an annoying, but inconsequential, 
anomaly.) 


21 


Academics' current practice of teaching Black-Scholes as revealed truth needs re-examination. For that 
matter, so does the academic's inclination to dwell on the valuation of options. You can be highly successful as 
an investor without having the slightest ability to value an option. What students should be learning is how to 
value a business. That's what investing is all about. 

Life and Debt 

The fundamental principle of auto racing is that to finish first, you must first finish. That dictum is 
equally applicable to business and guides our every action at Berkshire. 

Unquestionably, some people have become very rich through the use of borrowed money. However, 
that's also been a way to get very poor. When leverage works, it magnifies your gains. Your spouse thinks you're 
clever, and your neighbors get envious. But leverage is addictive. Once having profited from its wonders, very 
few people retreat to more conservative practices. And as we all learned in third grade - and some relearned in 
2008 - any series of positive numbers, however impressive the numbers may be, evaporates when multiplied by a 
single zero. History tells us that leverage all too often produces zeroes, even when it is employed by very smart 
people. 

Leverage, of course, can be lethal to businesses as well. Companies with large debts often assume that 
these obligations can be refinanced as they mature. That assumption is usually valid. Occasionally, though, either 
because of company-specific problems or a worldwide shortage of credit, maturities must actually be met by 
payment. For that, only cash will do the job. 

Borrowers then learn that credit is like oxygen. When either is abundant, its presence goes unnoticed. 
When either is missing, that's all that is noticed. Even a short absence of credit can bring a company to its knees. 
In September 2008, in fact, its overnight disappearance in many sectors of the economy came dangerously close 
to bringing our entire country to its knees. 

Charlie and I have no interest in any activity that could pose the slightest threat to Berkshire's well- 
being. (With our having a combined age of 167, starting over is not on our bucket list.) We are forever conscious 
of the fact that you, our partners, have entrusted us with what in many cases is a major portion of your savings. In 
addition, important philanthropy is dependent on our prudence. Finally, many disabled victims of accidents 
caused by our insureds are counting on us to deliver sums payable decades from now. It would be irresponsible 
for us to risk what all these constituencies need just to pursue a few points of extra return. 

A little personal history may partially explain our extreme aversion to financial adventurism. I didn't 
meet Charlie until he was 35, though he grew up within 100 yards of where I have lived for 52 years and also 
attended the same inner-city public high school in Omaha from which my father, wife, children and two 
grandchildren graduated. Charlie and I did, however, both work as young boys at my grandfather's grocery store, 
though our periods of employment were separated by about five years. My grandfather's name was Ernest, and 
perhaps no man was more aptly named. No one worked for Ernest, even as a stock boy, without being shaped by 
the experience. 

On the facing page you can read a letter sent in 1939 by Ernest to his youngest son, my Uncle Fred. 
Similar letters went to his other four children. I still have the letter sent to my Aunt Alice, which I found - along 
with $1,000 of cash - when, as executor of her estate, I opened her safe deposit box in 1970. 

Ernest never went to business school - he never in fact finished high school - but he understood the 
importance of liquidity as a condition for assured survival. At Berkshire, we have taken his $1,000 solution a bit 
further and have pledged that we will hold at least $10 billion of cash, excluding that held at our regulated utility 
and railroad businesses. Because of that commitment, we customarily keep at least $20 billion on hand so that we 
can both withstand unprecedented insurance losses (our largest to date having been about $3 billion from Katrina, 
the insurance industry's most expensive catastrophe) and quickly seize acquisition or investment opportunities, 
even during times of financial turmoil. 


22 


Dear Fred & Catherine: 


Over a period of a good many years I have known a great many 
people who at some time or another have suffered in various ways 
simply because they did not have ready cash. I have known people 
who have had to sacrifice some of their holdings in order to have 
money that was necessary at that time* 

For a good many years your grandfather kept a certain amount 
of money where he could put his hands on It In very short notice* 

For a number of years I have made it a point to keep a reserve, 
should some occasion come up where I would need money quickly, with- 
out disturbing the money that I have in my business. There have 
been a couple occasions when I found it very convenient to go to 
this fund* 


Thus, I feel that everyone should have a reserve. I hope it 
never happens to you, but the chances are that some day you v/111 
need money, and need it badly, and with this thought in view, I 
started a fund by placing $SQO,00 in an envelope,with your name on 
it, when you were married. Each year I added something to it, until 
there is now $1000.00 in the fund* 

Ten years have elapsed since you were married, and this fund 
is now completed* 

It Is my wish that you place this envelope in your safety 
deposit box, and keep it for the purpose that it was created, for. 
Should the time come when you need part, I wohld suggest that you 
use as little as possible, and replace it as soon as possible* 

You might feel that this should be invested and bring you an 
income. Forget it — the mental satisfaction of having $1000*00 
laid away where you can put your hands on it, is worth more than 
what interest it might bring, especially if you have the investment 
in something that you could not realize on quickly* 

If in after years you feel this has been a good idea, you 
might repeat it with your own ohildren* 

For your information, I might mention that there has never 
been a Buffett who ever left a very large estate, but there has 
never been one that did not leave something* They never spent all 
they made, but always saved part of what they made, and it has all 
worked out pretty well* 

This letter is being written at the expiration of ten years 
after you were married* 


23 


We keep our cash largely in U.S. Treasury bills and avoid other short-term securities yielding a few 
more basis points, a policy we adhered to long before the frailties of commercial paper and money market funds 
became apparent in September 2008. We agree with investment writer Ray DeVoe's observation, "More money 
has been lost reaching for yield than at the point of a gun." At Berkshire, we don't rely on bank lines, and we 
don't enter into contracts that could require postings of collateral except for amounts that are tiny in relation to 
our liquid assets. 

Furthermore, not a dime of cash has left Berkshire for dividends or share repurchases during the past 
40 years. Instead, we have retained all of our earnings to strengthen our business, a reinforcement now running 
about $1 billion per month. Our net worth has thus increased from $48 million to $157 billion during those four 
decades and our intrinsic value has grown far more. No other American corporation has come close to building 
up its financial strength in this unrelenting way. 

By being so cautious in respect to leverage, we penalize our returns by a minor amount. Having loads of 
liquidity, though, lets us sleep well. Moreover, during the episodes of financial chaos that occasionally erupt in our 
economy, we will be equipped both financially and emotionally to play offense while others scramble for survival. 
That's what allowed us to invest $15.6 billion in 25 days of panic following the Lehman bankruptcy in 2008. 

The Annual Meeting 

The annual meeting will be held on Saturday, April 30 th . Carrie Kizer from our home office will be the 
ringmaster, and her theme this year is Planes, Trains and Automobiles. This gives NetJets, BNSF and BYD a 
chance to show off. 

As always, the doors will open at the Qwest Center at 7 a.m., and a new Berkshire movie will be shown at 
8:30. At 9:30 we will go directly to the question-and-answer period, which (with a break for lunch at the Qwest' s 
stands) will last until 3:30. After a short recess, Charlie and I will convene the annual meeting at 3:45. If you decide 
to leave during the day's question periods, please do so while Charlie is talking. (Act fast; he can be terse.) 

The best reason to exit, of course, is to shop. We will help you do that by filling the 194,300-square- 
foot hall that adjoins the meeting area with products from dozens of Berkshire subsidiaries. Last year, you did 
your part, and most locations racked up record sales. In a nine-hour period, we sold 1,053 pairs of Justin boots, 
12,416 pounds of See's candy, 8,000 Dairy Queen Blizzards® and 8,800 Quikut knives (that's 16 knives per 
minute). But you can do better. Remember: Anyone who says money can't buy happiness simply hasn't learned 
where to shop. 

GEICO will have a booth staffed by a number of its top counselors from around the country, all of 
them ready to supply you with auto insurance quotes. In most cases, GEICO will be able to give you a 
shareholder discount (usually 8%). This special offer is permitted by 44 of the 51 jurisdictions in which we 
operate. (One supplemental point: The discount is not additive if you qualify for another, such as that given 
certain groups.) Bring the details of your existing insurance and check out whether we can save you money. For 
at least half of you, I believe we can. 

Be sure to visit the Bookworm. It will carry more than 60 books and DVDs, including the Chinese 
language edition of Poor Charlie's Almanack, the ever-popular book about my partner. So what if you can't read 
Chinese? Just buy a copy and carry it around; it will make you look urbane and erudite. Should you need to ship 
your book purchases, a shipping service will be available nearby. 

If you are a big spender - or merely a gawker - visit Elliott Aviation on the east side of the Omaha 
airport between noon and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. There we will have a fleet of NetJets aircraft that will get your 
pulse racing. Come by bus; leave by private jet. 


24 


An attachment to the proxy material that is enclosed with this report explains how you can obtain the 
credential you will need for admission to the meeting and other events. As for plane, hotel and car reservations, 
we have again signed up American Express (800-799-6634) to give you special help. Carol Pedersen, who 
handles these matters, does a terrific job for us each year, and I thank her for it. Hotel rooms can be hard to find, 
but work with Carol and you will get one. 

Airlines have often jacked up prices - sometimes dramatically so - for the Berkshire weekend. If you 
are coming from far away, compare the cost of flying to Kansas City versus Omaha. The drive is about 2 Vi hours 
and it may be that you can save significant money, particularly if you had planned to rent a car in Omaha. 

At Nebraska Furniture Mart, located on a 77-acre site on 72 nd Street between Dodge and Pacific, we 
will again be having "Berkshire Weekend" discount pricing. Last year the store did $33.3 million of business 
during its annual meeting sale, a volume that - as far as I know - exceeds the one-week total of any retail store 
anyplace. To obtain the Berkshire discount, you must make your purchases between Tuesday, April 26 th and 
Monday, May 2 nd inclusive, and also present your meeting credential. The period's special pricing will even 
apply to the products of several prestigious manufacturers that normally have ironclad rules against 
discounting but which, in the spirit of our shareholder weekend, have made an exception for you. 
We appreciate their cooperation. NFM is open from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10 a.m. 
to 6 p.m. on Sunday. On Saturday this year, from 5:30 p.m. to 8 p.m., NFM is having a picnic to which you are 
all invited. 

At Borsheims, we will again have two shareholder-only events. The first will be a cocktail reception 
from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. on Friday, April 29 th . The second, the main gala, will be held on Sunday, May 1 st , from 
9 a.m. to 4 p.m. On Saturday, we will be open until 6 p.m. On Sunday, around 1 p.m., I will be at Borsheims 
with a smile and a shoeshine, selling jewelry just as I sold men's shirts at J.C. Penney's 63 years ago. 
Fve told Susan Jacques, Borsheims' CEO, that I'm still a hotshot salesman. But I see doubt in her eyes. 
So cut loose and buy something from me for your wife or sweetheart (presumably the same person). Make me 
look good. 

We will have huge crowds at Borsheims throughout the weekend. For your convenience, therefore, 
shareholder prices will be available from Monday, April 25 lh through Saturday, May 7 th . During that period, 
please identify yourself as a shareholder by presenting your meeting credentials or a brokerage statement that 
shows you are a Berkshire shareholder. 

On Sunday, in the mall outside of Borsheims, a blindfolded Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess champion, 
will take on all comers - who will have their eyes wide open - in groups of six. Nearby, Norman Beck, a 
remarkable magician from Dallas, will bewilder onlookers. Additionally, we will have Bob Hamman and Sharon 
Osberg, two of the world's top bridge experts, available to play bridge with our shareholders on Sunday 
afternoon. 

Gorat's and Piccolo's will again be open exclusively for Berkshire shareholders on Sunday, May 1 st . 
Both will be serving until 10 p.m., with Gorat's opening at 1 p.m. and Piccolo's opening at 4 p.m. These 
restaurants are my favorites and - still being a growing boy - I will eat at both of them on Sunday evening. 
Remember: To make a reservation at Gorat's, call 402-551-3733 on April 1 st (but not before) and at Piccolo's 
call 402-342-9038. 

We will again have the same three financial journalists lead the question-and-answer period, asking 
Charlie and me questions that shareholders have submitted to them by e-mail. The journalists and their e-mail 
addresses are: Carol Loomis, of Fortune, who may be emailed at cloomis@fortunemail.com; Becky Quick, of 
CNBC, at BerkshireQuestions@cnbc.com, and Andrew Ross Sorkin, of The New York Times, at 
arsorkin @ nytimes.com. 

From the questions submitted, each journalist will choose the dozen or so he or she decides are the 
most interesting and important. The journalists have told me your question has the best chance of being selected 
if you keep it concise, avoid sending it in at the last moment, make it Berkshire-related and include no more than 
two questions in any email you send them. (In your email, let the journalist know if you would like your name 
mentioned if your question is selected.) 

Neither Charlie nor I will get so much as a clue about the questions to be asked. We know the 
journalists will pick some tough ones, and that's the way we like it. 


25 


We will again have a drawing at 8:15 a.m. on Saturday at each of 13 microphones for those 
shareholders wishing to ask questions themselves. At the meeting, I will alternate the questions asked by the 
journalists with those from the winning shareholders. We hope to answer at least 60 questions. From our 
standpoint, the more the better. Our goal, which we pursue both through these annual letters and by our meeting 
discussions, is to give you a better understanding of the business that you own. 

For good reason, I regularly extol the accomplishments of our operating managers. Equally important, 
however, are the 20 men and women who work with me at our corporate office (all on one floor, which is the 
way we intend to keep it!). 

This group efficiently deals with a multitude of SEC and other regulatory requirements, files a 14,097- 
page Federal income tax return along with state and foreign returns, responds to countless shareholder and media 
inquiries, gets out the annual report, prepares for the country's largest annual meeting, coordinates the Board's 
activities - and the list goes on and on. 

They handle all of these business tasks cheerfully and with unbelievable efficiency, making my life 
easy and joyful. Their efforts go beyond activities strictly related to Berkshire: They deal with 48 universities 
(selected from 200 applicants) who will send students to Omaha this school year for a day with me and also 
handle all kinds of requests that I receive, arrange my travel, and even get me hamburgers for lunch. No CEO has 
it better. 

This home office crew has my deepest thanks and deserves yours as well. Come to our Woodstock for 
Capitalism on April 30 th and tell them so. 

February 26, 20 1 1 Warren E. Buffett 

Chairman of the Board 


26 


Memo 


To: Berkshire Hathaway Managers ("The All-Stars") 
cc: Berkshire Directors 
From: Warren E. Buffett 
Date: July 26, 2010 

This is my biennial letter to reemphasize Berkshire's top priority and to get your help on 
succession planning (yours, not mine!). 

The priority is that all of us continue to zealously guard Berkshire's reputation. We can't be 
perfect but we can try to be. As I've said in these memos for more than 25 years: "We can afford to lose 
money - even a lot of money. But we can't afford to lose reputation - even a shred of reputation." We 
must continue to measure every act against not only what is legal but also what we would be happy to have 
written about on the front page of a national newspaper in an article written by an unfriendly but intelligent 
reporter. 

Sometimes your associates will say "Everybody else is doing it." This rationale is almost always 
a bad one if it is the main justification for a business action. It is totally unacceptable when evaluating a 
moral decision. Whenever somebody offers that phrase as a rationale, in effect they are saying that they 
can't come up with a good reason. If anyone gives this explanation, tell them to try using it with a reporter 
or a judge and see how far it gets them. 

If you see anything whose propriety or legality causes you to hesitate, be sure to give me a call. 
However, it's very likely that if a given course of action evokes such hesitation, it's too close to the line 
and should be abandoned. There's plenty of money to be made in the center of the court. If it's 
questionable whether some action is close to the line, just assume it is outside and forget it. 

As a corollary, let me know promptly if there's any significant bad news. I can handle bad news 
but I don't like to deal with it after it has festered for awhile. A reluctance to face up immediately to bad 
news is what turned a problem at Salomon from one that could have easily been disposed of into one that 
almost caused the demise of a firm with 8,000 employees. 


104 


Somebody is doing something today at Berkshire that you and I would be unhappy about if we 
knew of it. That's inevitable: We now employ more than 250,000 people and the chances of that number 
getting through the day without any bad behavior occurring is nil. But we can have a huge effect in 
minimizing such activities by jumping on anything immediately when there is the slightest odor of 
impropriety. Your attitude on such matters, expressed by behavior as well as words, will be the most 
important factor in how the culture of your business develops. Culture, more than rule books, determines 
how an organization behaves. 

In other respects, talk to me about what is going on as little or as much as you wish. Each of you 
does a first-class job of running your operation with your own individual style and you don't need me to 
help. The only items you need to clear with me are any changes in post-retirement benefits and any 
unusually large capital expenditures or acquisitions. 

I need your help in respect to the question of succession. I'm not looking for any of you to retire 
and I hope you all live to 100. (In Charlie's case, 1 10.) But just in case you don't, please send me a letter 
(at home if you wish) giving your recommendation as who should take over tomorrow if you should 
become incapacitated overnight. These letters will be seen by no one but me unless I'm no longer CEO, in 
which case my successor will need the information. Please summarize the strengths and weaknesses of 
your primary candidate as well as any possible alternates you may wish to include. Most of you have 
participated in this exercise in the past and others have offered your ideas verbally. However, it's 
important to me to get a periodic update, and now that we have added so many businesses, I need to have 
your thoughts in writing rather than trying to carry them around in my memory. Of course, there are a few 
operations that are run by two or more of you - such as the Blumkins, the Merschmans, the pair at Applied 
Underwriters, etc. - and in these cases, just forget about this item. Your note can be short, informal, 
handwritten, etc. Just mark it "Personal for Warren." 

Thanks for your help on all of this. And thanks for the way you run your businesses. You make 
my job easy. 

WEB/db 

P.S. Another minor request: Please turn down all proposals for me to speak, make contributions, intercede 
with the Gates Foundation, etc. Sometimes these requests for you to act as intermediary will be 
accompanied by "It can't hurt to ask." It will be easier for both of us if you just say "no." As an added 
favor, don't suggest that they instead write or call me. Multiply 76 businesses by the periodic "I think he'll 
be interested in this one" and you can understand why it is better to say no firmly and immediately. 


105 


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY INC. 


To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.: 

The per-share book value of both our Class A and Class B stock increased by 4.6% in 2011. Over the 
last 47 years (that is, since present management took over), book value has grown from $19 to $99,860, a rate of 
19.8% compounded annually.* 

Charlie Munger, Berkshire's Vice Chairman and my partner, and I feel good about the company's 
progress during 201 1. Here are the highlights: 

• The primary job of a Board of Directors is to see that the right people are running the business and to 
be sure that the next generation of leaders is identified and ready to take over tomorrow. I have been on 
19 corporate boards, and Berkshire's directors are at the top of the list in the time and diligence they 
have devoted to succession planning. What's more, their efforts have paid off. 

As 2011 started, Todd Combs joined us as an investment manager, and shortly after yearend Ted 
Weschler came aboard. Both of these men have outstanding investment skills and a deep commitment 
to Berkshire. Each will be handling a few billion dollars in 2012, but they have the brains, judgment 
and character to manage our entire portfolio when Charlie and I are no longer running Berkshire. 

Your Board is equally enthusiastic about my successor as CEO, an individual to whom they have had a 
great deal of exposure and whose managerial and human qualities they admire. (We have two superb 
back-up candidates as well.) When a transfer of responsibility is required, it will be seamless, and 
Berkshire's prospects will remain bright. More than 98% of my net worth is in Berkshire stock, all of 
which will go to various philanthropies. Being so heavily concentrated in one stock defies conventional 
wisdom. But I'm fine with this arrangement, knowing both the quality and diversity of the businesses 
we own and the caliber of the people who manage them. With these assets, my successor will enjoy a 
running start. Do not, however, infer from this discussion that Charlie and I are going anywhere; we 
continue to be in excellent health, and we love what we do. 

• On September 16 th we acquired Lubrizol, a worldwide producer of additives and other specialty 
chemicals. The company has had an outstanding record since James Hambrick became CEO in 2004, 
with pre-tax profits increasing from $147 million to $1,085 million. Lubrizol will have many 
opportunities for "bolt-on" acquisitions in the specialty chemical field. Indeed, we've already agreed to 
three, costing $493 million. James is a disciplined buyer and a superb operator. Charlie and I are eager 
to expand his managerial domain. 

• Our major businesses did well last year. In fact, each of our five largest non-insurance companies - BNSF, 
Iscar, Lubrizol, Marmon Group and MidAmerican Energy - delivered record operating earnings. In 
aggregate these businesses earned more than $9 billion pre-tax in 2011. Contrast that to seven years ago, 
when we owned only one of the five, MidAmerican, whose pre-tax earnings were $393 million. Unless the 
economy weakens in 2012, each of our fabulous five should again set a record, with aggregate earnings 
comfortably topping $10 billion. 


* All per-share figures used in this report apply to Berkshire's A shares. Figures for the B shares are 
1/1 500 th of those shown for A. 


3 


In total, our entire string of operating companies spent $8.2 billion for property, plant and equipment in 
2011, smashing our previous record by more than $2 billion. About 95% of these outlays were made in 
the U.S., a fact that may surprise those who believe our country lacks investment opportunities. We 
welcome projects abroad, but expect the overwhelming majority of Berkshire's future capital 
commitments to be in America. In 2012, these expenditures will again set a record. 

Our insurance operations continued their delivery of costless capital that funds a myriad of other 
opportunities. This business produces "float" - money that doesn't belong to us, but that we get to 
invest for Berkshire's benefit. And if we pay out less in losses and expenses than we receive in 
premiums, we additionally earn an underwriting profit, meaning the float costs us less than nothing. 
Though we are sure to have underwriting losses from time to time, we've now had nine consecutive 
years of underwriting profits, totaling about $17 billion. Over the same nine years our float increased 
from $41 billion to its current record of $70 billion. Insurance has been good to us. 

Finally, we made two major investments in marketable securities: (1) a $5 billion 6% preferred stock of 
Bank of America that came with warrants allowing us to buy 700 million common shares at $7.14 per 
share any time before September 2, 2021; and (2) 63.9 million shares of IBM that cost us $10.9 billion. 
Counting IBM, we now have large ownership interests in four exceptional companies: 13.0% of 
American Express, 8.8% of Coca-Cola, 5.5% of IBM and 7.6% of Wells Fargo. (We also, of course, 
have many smaller, but important, positions.) 

We view these holdings as partnership interests in wonderful businesses, not as marketable securities to 
be bought or sold based on their near-term prospects. Our share of their earnings, however, are far from 
fully reflected in our earnings; only the dividends we receive from these businesses show up in our 
financial reports. Over time, though, the undistributed earnings of these companies that are attributable 
to our ownership are of huge importance to us. That's because they will be used in a variety of ways to 
increase future earnings and dividends of the investee. They may also be devoted to stock repurchases, 
which will increase our share of the company's future earnings. 

Had we owned our present positions throughout last year, our dividends from the "Big Four" would 
have been $862 million. That's all that would have been reported in Berkshire's income statement. Our 
share of this quartet's earnings, however, would have been far greater: $3.3 billion. Charlie and I 
believe that the $2.4 billion that goes unreported on our books creates at least that amount of value for 
Berkshire as it fuels earnings gains in future years. We expect the combined earnings of the four - and 
their dividends as well - to increase in 2012 and, for that matter, almost every year for a long time to 
come. A decade from now, our current holdings of the four companies might well account for earnings 
of $7 billion, of which $2 billion in dividends would come to us. 

I've run out of good news. Here are some developments that hurt us during 201 1: 

A few years back, I spent about $2 billion buying several bond issues of Energy Future Holdings, an 
electric utility operation serving portions of Texas. That was a mistake - a big mistake. In large measure, 
the company's prospects were tied to the price of natural gas, which tanked shortly after our purchase and 
remains depressed. Though we have annually received interest payments of about $102 million since our 
purchase, the company's ability to pay will soon be exhausted unless gas prices rise substantially. We 
wrote down our investment by $1 billion in 2010 and by an additional $390 million last year. 

At yearend, we carried the bonds at their market value of $878 million. If gas prices remain at present 
levels, we will likely face a further loss, perhaps in an amount that will virtually wipe out our current 
carrying value. Conversely, a substantial increase in gas prices might allow us to recoup some, or even 
all, of our write-down. However things turn out, I totally miscalculated the gain/loss probabilities when 
I purchased the bonds. In tennis parlance, this was a major unforced error by your chairman. 


4 


• Three large and very attractive fixed-income investments were called away from us by their issuers in 
2011. Swiss Re, Goldman Sachs and General Electric paid us an aggregate of $12.8 billion to redeem 
securities that were producing about $1.2 billion of pre-tax earnings for Berkshire. That's a lot of 
income to replace, though our Lubrizol purchase did offset most of it. 

• Last year, I told you that "a housing recovery will probably begin within a year or so." I was dead 
wrong. We have five businesses whose results are significantly influenced by housing activity. The 
connection is direct at Clayton Homes, which is the largest producer of homes in the country, 
accounting for about 7% of those constructed during 201 1. 

Additionally, Acme Brick, Shaw (carpet), Johns Manville (insulation) and MiTek (building products, 
primarily connector plates used in roofing) are all materially affected by construction activity. In 
aggregate, our five housing-related companies had pre-tax profits of $513 million in 2011. That's 
similar to 2010 but down from $1.8 billion in 2006. 

Housing will come back - you can be sure of that. Over time, the number of housing units necessarily 
matches the number of households (after allowing for a normal level of vacancies). For a period of 
years prior to 2008, however, America added more housing units than households. Inevitably, we 
ended up with far too many units and the bubble popped with a violence that shook the entire economy. 
That created still another problem for housing: Early in a recession, household formations slow, and in 
2009 the decrease was dramatic. 

That devastating supply/demand equation is now reversed: Every day we are creating more households 
than housing units. People may postpone hitching up during uncertain times, but eventually hormones 
take over. And while "doubling-up" may be the initial reaction of some during a recession, living with 
in-laws can quickly lose its allure. 

At our current annual pace of 600,000 housing starts - considerably less than the number of new 
households being formed - buyers and renters are sopping up what's left of the old oversupply. (This 
process will run its course at different rates around the country; the supply-demand situation varies 
widely by locale.) While this healing takes place, however, our housing-related companies sputter, 
employing only 43,315 people compared to 58,769 in 2006. This hugely important sector of the 
economy, which includes not only construction but everything that feeds off of it, remains in a 
depression of its own. I believe this is the major reason a recovery in employment has so severely 
lagged the steady and substantial comeback we have seen in almost all other sectors of our economy. 

Wise monetary and fiscal policies play an important role in tempering recessions, but these tools don't 
create households nor eliminate excess housing units. Fortunately, demographics and our market 
system will restore the needed balance - probably before long. When that day comes, we will again 
build one million or more residential units annually. I believe pundits will be surprised at how far 
unemployment drops once that happens. They will then reawake to what has been true since 1776: 
America's best days lie ahead. 

Intrinsic Business Value 

Charlie and I measure our performance by the rate of gain in Berkshire's per-share intrinsic business 
value. If our gain over time outstrips the performance of the S&P 500, we have earned our paychecks. If it 
doesn't, we are overpaid at any price. 

We have no way to pinpoint intrinsic value. But we do have a useful, though considerably understated, 
proxy for it: per-share book value. This yardstick is meaningless at most companies. At Berkshire, however, 
book value very roughly tracks business values. That's because the amount by which Berkshire's intrinsic value 
exceeds book value does not swing wildly from year to year, though it increases in most years. Over time, the 
divergence will likely become ever more substantial in absolute terms, remaining reasonably steady, however, on 
a percentage basis as both the numerator and denominator of the business-value/book-value equation increase. 


5 


We've regularly emphasized that our book-value performance is almost certain to outpace the S&P 500 
in a bad year for the stock market and just as certainly will fall short in a strong up-year. The test is how we do 
over time. Last year's annual report included a table laying out results for the 42 five-year periods since we took 
over at Berkshire in 1965 (i.e., 1965-69, 1966-70, etc.). All showed our book value beating the S&P, and our 
string held for 2007-11. It will almost certainly snap, though, if the S&P 500 should put together a five-year 
winning streak (which it may well be on its way to doing as I write this). 

I also included two tables last year that set forth the key quantitative ingredients that will help you 
estimate our per-share intrinsic value. I won't repeat the full discussion here; you can find it reproduced on 
pages 99-100. To update the tables shown there, our per-share investments in 201 1 increased 4% to $98,366, and 
our pre-tax earnings from businesses other than insurance and investments increased 18% to $6,990 per share. 

Charlie and I like to see gains in both areas, but our primary focus is on building operating earnings. Over 
time, the businesses we currently own should increase their aggregate earnings, and we hope also to purchase some 
large operations that will give us a further boost. We now have eight subsidiaries that would each be included in the 
Fortune 500 were they stand-alone companies. That leaves only 492 to go. My task is clear, and I'm on the prowl. 

Share Repurchases 

Last September, we announced that Berkshire would repurchase its shares at a price of up to 110% of book 
value. We were in the market for only a few days - buying $67 million of stock - before the price advanced beyond 
our limit. Nonetheless, the general importance of share repurchases suggests I should focus for a bit on the subject. 

Charlie and I favor repurchases when two conditions are met: first, a company has ample funds to take 
care of the operational and liquidity needs of its business; second, its stock is selling at a material discount to the 
company's intrinsic business value, conservatively calculated. 

We have witnessed many bouts of repurchasing that failed our second test. Sometimes, of course, 
infractions - even serious ones - are innocent; many CEOs never stop believing their stock is cheap. In other 
instances, a less benign conclusion seems warranted. It doesn't suffice to say that repurchases are being made to 
offset the dilution from stock issuances or simply because a company has excess cash. Continuing shareholders 
are hurt unless shares are purchased below intrinsic value. The first law of capital allocation - whether the 
money is slated for acquisitions or share repurchases - is that what is smart at one price is dumb at another. (One 
CEO who always stresses the price/value factor in repurchase decisions is Jamie Dimon at J.P. Morgan; I 
recommend that you read his annual letter.) 

Charlie and I have mixed emotions when Berkshire shares sell well below intrinsic value. We like 
making money for continuing shareholders, and there is no surer way to do that than by buying an asset - our 
own stock - that we know to be worth at least x for less than that - for .9x, .8x or even lower. (As one of our 
directors says, it's like shooting fish in a barrel, after the barrel has been drained and the fish have quit flopping.) 
Nevertheless, we don't enjoy cashing out partners at a discount, even though our doing so may give the selling 
shareholders a slightly higher price than they would receive if our bid was absent. When we are buying, 
therefore, we want those exiting partners to be fully informed about the value of the assets they are selling. 

At our limit price of 110% of book value, repurchases clearly increase Berkshire's per-share intrinsic 
value. And the more and the cheaper we buy, the greater the gain for continuing shareholders. Therefore, if given 
the opportunity, we will likely repurchase stock aggressively at our price limit or lower. You should know, 
however, that we have no interest in supporting the stock and that our bids will fade in particularly weak markets. 
Nor will we buy shares if our cash-equivalent holdings are below $20 billion. At Berkshire, financial strength 
that is unquestionable takes precedence over all else. 

This discussion of repurchases offers me the chance to address the irrational reaction of many investors 
to changes in stock prices. When Berkshire buys stock in a company that is repurchasing shares, we hope for two 
events: First, we have the normal hope that earnings of the business will increase at a good clip for a long time to 
come; and second, we also hope that the stock underperforms in the market for a long time as well. A corollary to 
this second point: "Talking our book" about a stock we own - were that to be effective - would actually be 
harmful to Berkshire, not helpful as commentators customarily assume. 


6 


Let's use IBM as an example. As all business observers know, CEOs Lou Gerstner and Sam Palmisano 
did a superb job in moving IBM from near-bankruptcy twenty years ago to its prominence today. Their 
operational accomplishments were truly extraordinary. 

But their financial management was equally brilliant, particularly in recent years as the company's 
financial flexibility improved. Indeed, I can think of no major company that has had better financial management, a 
skill that has materially increased the gains enjoyed by IBM shareholders. The company has used debt wisely, made 
value-adding acquisitions almost exclusively for cash and aggressively repurchased its own stock. 

Today, IBM has 1.16 billion shares outstanding, of which we own about 63.9 million or 5.5%. 
Naturally, what happens to the company's earnings over the next five years is of enormous importance to us. 
Beyond that, the company will likely spend $50 billion or so in those years to repurchase shares. Our quiz for the 
day: What should a long-term shareholder, such as Berkshire, cheer for during that period? 

I won't keep you in suspense. We should wish for IBM's stock price to languish throughout the five years. 

Let's do the math. If IBM's stock price averages, say, $200 during the period, the company will acquire 
250 million shares for its $50 billion. There would consequently be 910 million shares outstanding, and we 
would own about 7% of the company. If the stock conversely sells for an average of $300 during the five-year 
period, IBM will acquire only 167 million shares. That would leave about 990 million shares outstanding after 
five years, of which we would own 6.5%. 

If IBM were to earn, say, $20 billion in the fifth year, our share of those earnings would be a full $100 
million greater under the "disappointing" scenario of a lower stock price than they would have been at the higher 
price. At some later point our shares would be worth perhaps $1 Vi billion more than if the "high-price" 
repurchase scenario had taken place. 

The logic is simple: If you are going to be a net buyer of stocks in the future, either directly with your own 
money or indirectly (through your ownership of a company that is repurchasing shares), you are hurt when stocks 
rise. You benefit when stocks swoon. Emotions, however, too often complicate the matter: Most people, including 
those who will be net buyers in the future, take comfort in seeing stock prices advance. These shareholders resemble 
a commuter who rejoices after the price of gas increases, simply because his tank contains a day's supply. 

Charlie and I don't expect to win many of you over to our way of thinking - we've observed enough 
human behavior to know the futility of that - but we do want you to be aware of our personal calculus. And here 
a confession is in order: In my early days I, too, rejoiced when the market rose. Then I read Chapter Eight of Ben 
Graham's The Intelligent Investor, the chapter dealing with how investors should view fluctuations in stock 
prices. Immediately the scales fell from my eyes, and low prices became my friend. Picking up that book was one 
of the luckiest moments in my life. 

In the end, the success of our IBM investment will be determined primarily by its future earnings. But 
an important secondary factor will be how many shares the company purchases with the substantial sums it is 
likely to devote to this activity. And if repurchases ever reduce the IBM shares outstanding to 63.9 million, I will 
abandon my famed frugality and give Berkshire employees a paid holiday. 

Now, let's examine the four major sectors of our operations. Each has vastly different balance sheet 
and income characteristics from the others. Lumping them together therefore impedes analysis. So we'll present 
them as four separate businesses, which is how Charlie and I view them. Because we may be repurchasing 
Berkshire shares from some of you, we will offer our thoughts in each section as to how intrinsic value compares 
to carrying value. 


7 


Insurance 


Let's look first at insurance, Berkshire's core operation and the engine that has propelled our expansion 
over the years. 

Property-casualty ("P/C") insurers receive premiums upfront and pay claims later. In extreme cases, 
such as those arising from certain workers' compensation accidents, payments can stretch over decades. This 
collect-now, pay-later model leaves us holding large sums - money we call "float" - that will eventually go to 
others. Meanwhile, we get to invest this float for Berkshire's benefit. Though individual policies and claims 
come and go, the amount of float we hold remains remarkably stable in relation to premium volume. 
Consequently, as our business grows, so does our float. And how we have grown, as the following table shows: 


Year 

Float ( in $ mil 

1970 

$ 39 

1980 

237 

1990 

1,632 

2000 

27,871 

2010 

65,832 

2011 

70,571 


It's unlikely that our float will grow much - if at all - from its current level. That's mainly because we 
already have an outsized amount relative to our premium volume. Were there to be a decline in float, I will add, 
it would almost certainly be very gradual and therefore impose no unusual demand for funds on us. 

If our premiums exceed the total of our expenses and eventual losses, we register an underwriting profit 
that adds to the investment income our float produces. When such a profit occurs, we enjoy the use of free 
money - and, better yet, get paid for holding it. Unfortunately, the wish of all insurers to achieve this happy 
result creates intense competition, so vigorous in most years that it causes the P/C industry as a whole to 
operate at a significant underwriting loss. For example. State Farm, by far the country ' s largest insurer and a well-managed 
company besides, has incurred an underwriting loss in eight of the last eleven years. There are 
a lot of ways to lose money in insurance, and the industry is resourceful in creating new ones. 

As noted in the first section of this report, we have now operated at an underwriting profit for nine 
consecutive years, our gain for the period having totaled $17 billion. I believe it likely that we will continue to 
underwrite profitably in most - though certainly not all - future years. If we accomplish that, our float will be 
better than cost-free. We will profit just as we would if some party deposited $70.6 billion with us, paid us a fee 
for holding its money and then let us invest its funds for our own benefit. 

So how does this attractive float affect intrinsic value calculations? Our float is deducted in full as a 
liability in calculating Berkshire's book value, just as if we had to pay it out tomorrow and were unable to 
replenish it. But that's an incorrect way to view float, which should instead be viewed as a revolving fund. If 
float is both costless and long-enduring, the true value of this liability is far lower than the accounting liability. 

Partially offsetting this overstated liability is $15.5 billion of "goodwill" attributable to our insurance 
companies that is included in book value as an asset. In effect, this goodwill represents the price we paid for the 
float-generating capabilities of our insurance operations. The cost of the goodwill, however, has no bearing on its 
true value. If an insurance business produces large and sustained underwriting losses, any goodwill asset 
attributable to it should be deemed valueless, whatever its original cost. 

Fortunately, that's not the case at Berkshire. Charlie and I believe the true economic value of our 
insurance goodwill - what we would pay to purchase float of similar quality - to be far in excess of its historic 
carrying value. The value of our float is one reason - a huge reason - why we believe Berkshire's intrinsic 
business value substantially exceeds book value. 

Let me emphasize once again that cost-free float is not an outcome to be expected for the P/C industry 
as a whole: We don't think there is much "Berkshire-quality" float existing in the insurance world. In most years, 
including 2011, the industry's premiums have been inadequate to cover claims plus expenses. Consequently, the 


8 


industry's overall return on tangible equity has for many decades fallen far short of the average return realized by 
American industry, a sorry performance almost certain to continue. Berkshire's outstanding economics exist only 
because we have some terrific managers running some extraordinary insurance operations. Let me tell you about 
the major units. 

First by float size is the Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group, run by Ajit Jain. Ajit insures risks 
that no one else has the desire or the capital to take on. His operation combines capacity, speed, decisiveness and, 
most importantly, brains in a manner that is unique in the insurance business. Yet he never exposes Berkshire to 
risks that are inappropriate in relation to our resources. Indeed, we are far more conservative in that respect than 
most large insurers. For example, if the insurance industry should experience a $250 billion loss from some 
mega-catastrophe - a loss about triple anything it has ever faced - Berkshire as a whole would likely record a 
moderate profit for the year because of its many streams of earnings. Concurrently, all other major insurers and 
reinsurers would be far in the red, and some would face insolvency. 

From a standing start in 1985, Ajit has created an insurance business with float of $34 billion and 
significant underwriting profits, a feat that no CEO of any other insurer has come close to matching. By these 
accomplishments, he has added a great many billions of dollars to the value of Berkshire. Charlie would gladly 
trade me for a second Ajit. Alas, there is none. 

We have another insurance powerhouse in General Re, managed by Tad Montross. 

At bottom, a sound insurance operation needs to adhere to four disciplines. It must (1) understand all 
exposures that might cause a policy to incur losses; (2) conservatively evaluate the likelihood of any exposure 
actually causing a loss and the probable cost if it does; (3) set a premium that will deliver a profit, on average, 
after both prospective loss costs and operating expenses are covered; and (4) be willing to walk away if the 
appropriate premium can't be obtained. 

Many insurers pass the first three tests and flunk the fourth. They simply can't turn their back on business 
that their competitors are eagerly writing. That old line, "The other guy is doing it so we must as well," spells 
trouble in any business, but in none more so than insurance. Indeed, a good underwriter needs an independent 
mindset akin to that of the senior citizen who received a call from his wife while driving home. "Albert, be careful," 
she warned, "I just heard on the radio that there's a car going the wrong way down the Interstate." "Mabel, they 
don't know the half of it," replied Albert, "It's not just one car, there are hundreds of them." 

Tad has observed all four of the insurance commandments, and it shows in his results. General Re's 
huge float has been better than cost-free under his leadership, and we expect that, on average, it will continue to 
be. In the first few years after we acquired it, General Re was a major headache. Now it's a treasure. 

Finally, there is GEICO, the insurer on which I cut my teeth 61 years ago. GEICO is run by Tony 
Nicely, who joined the company at 18 and completed 50 years of service in 2011. 

GEICO' s much-envied record comes from Tony's brilliant execution of a superb and almost- 
impossible-to-replicate business model. During Tony's 18-year tenure as CEO, our market share has grown from 2.0% 
to 9.3%. If it had instead remained static - as it had for more than a decade before he took over - our premium volume 
would now be $3.3 billion rather than the $15.4 billion we attained in 2011. The extra value created by Tony and his 
associates is a major element in Berkshire's excess of intrinsic value over book value. 

There is still more than 90% of the auto-insurance market left for GEICO to rake in. Don't bet against 
Tony acquiring chunks of it year after year in the future. Our low costs permit low prices, and every day more 
Americans discover that the Gecko is doing them a favor when he urges them to visit GEICO.com for a quote. 
(Our lizard has another endearing quality: Unlike human spokesmen or spokeswomen who expensively represent 
other insurance companies, our little fellow has no agent.) 

In addition to our three major insurance operations, we own a group of smaller companies, most of 
them plying their trade in odd corners of the insurance world. In aggregate, their results have consistently been 
profitable and the float they provide us is substantial. Charlie and I treasure these companies and their managers. 


9 


At yearend, we acquired Princeton Insurance, a New Jersey writer of medical malpractice policies. This 
bolt-on transaction expands the managerial domain of Tim Kenesey, the star CEO of Medical Protective, our 
Indiana-based med-mal insurer. Princeton brings with it more than $600 million of float, an amount that is 
included in the following table. 

Here is the record of all four segments of our property-casualty and life insurance businesses: 


Underwriting Profit Yearend Float 
(in millions) 

Insurance Operations 2011 2010 2011 2010 

BH Reinsurance $(714) $ 176 $33,728 $30,370 

General Re 144 452 19,714 20,049 

GEICO 576 1,117 11,169 10,272 

Other Primary 242 268 5,960 5,141 


$ 248 $2,013 $70,571 $65,832 


Among large insurance operations, Berkshire's impresses me as the best in the world. 

Regulated, Capital-intensive Businesses 

We have two very large businesses, BNSF and MidAmerican Energy, that have important common 
characteristics distinguishing them from our many other businesses. Consequently, we assign them their own sector 
in this letter and also split out their combined financial statistics in our GAAP balance sheet and income statement. 

A key characteristic of both companies is the huge investment they have in very long-lived, regulated 
assets, with these partially funded by large amounts of long-term debt that is not guaranteed by Berkshire. Our 
credit is not needed: Both businesses have earning power that even under terrible business conditions amply 
covers their interest requirements. In a less than robust economy during 2011, for example, BNSF's interest 
coverage was 9.5x. At MidAmerican, meanwhile, two key factors ensure its ability to service debt under all 
circumstances: The stability of earnings that is inherent in our exclusively offering an essential service and a 
diversity of earnings streams, which shield it from the actions of any single regulatory body. 

Measured by ton-miles, rail moves 42% of America's inter-city freight, and BNSF moves more than 
any other railroad - about 37% of the industry total. A little math will tell you that about 15% of all inter-city 
ton-miles of freight in the U.S. is transported by BNSF. It is no exaggeration to characterize railroads as the 
circulatory system of our economy. Your railroad is the largest artery. 

All of this places a huge responsibility on us. We must, without fail, maintain and improve our 23,000 
miles of track along with 13,000 bridges, 80 tunnels, 6,900 locomotives and 78,600 freight cars. This job requires 
us to have ample financial resources under all economic scenarios and to have the human talent that can instantly 
and effectively deal with the vicissitudes of nature, such as the widespread flooding BNSF labored under last 
summer. 

To fulfill its societal obligation, BNSF regularly invests far more than its depreciation charge, with the 
excess amounting to $1.8 billion in 2011. The three other major U.S. railroads are making similar outlays. 
Though many people decry our country's inadequate infrastructure spending, that criticism cannot be levied 
against the railroad industry. It is pouring money - funds from the private sector - into the investment projects 
needed to provide better and more extensive service in the future. If railroads were not making these huge 
expenditures, our country's publicly-financed highway system would face even greater congestion and 
maintenance problems than exist today. 

Massive investments of the sort that BNSF is making would be foolish if it could not earn appropriate 
returns on the incremental sums it commits. But I am confident it will do so because of the value it delivers. 
Many years ago Ben Franklin counseled, "Keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee." Translating this to our 
regulated businesses, he might today say, "Take care of your customer, and the regulator - your customer's 
representative - will take care of you." Good behavior by each party begets good behavior in return. 


10 


At MidAmerican, we participate in a similar "social compact." We are expected to put up ever-increasing 
sums to satisfy the future needs of our customers. If we meanwhile operate reliably and efficiently, 
we know that we will obtain a fair return on these investments. 

MidAmerican, 89.8% owned by Berkshire, supplies 2.5 million customers in the U.S. with electricity, 
operating as the largest supplier in Iowa, Utah and Wyoming and as an important provider in six other states as 
well. Our pipelines transport 8% of the country's natural gas. Obviously, many millions of Americans depend on 
us every day. They haven't been disappointed. 

When MidAmerican purchased Northern Natural Gas pipeline in 2002, that company's performance as 
a pipeline was rated dead last, 43 out of 43, by the leading authority in the field. In the most recent report, 
Northern Natural was ranked second. The top spot was held by our other pipeline, Kern River. 

In its electric business, MidAmerican has a comparable record. In the most recent survey of customer 
satisfaction, MidAmerican' s U.S. utilities ranked second among 60 utility groups surveyed. The story was far 
different not many years back when MidAmerican acquired these properties. 

MidAmerican will have 3,316 megawatts of wind generation in operation by the end of 2012, far more 
than any other regulated electric utility in the country. The total amount that we have invested or committed to 
wind is a staggering $6 billion. We can make this sort of investment because MidAmerican retains all of its 
earnings, unlike other utilities that generally pay out most of what they earn. In addition, late last year we took on 
two solar projects - one 100%-owned in California and the other 49%-owned in Arizona - that will cost about $3 
billion to construct. Many more wind and solar projects will almost certainly follow. 

As you can tell by now, I am proud of what has been accomplished for our society by Matt Rose at 
BNSF and by Greg Abel at MidAmerican. I am also both proud and grateful for what they have accomplished for 
Berkshire shareholders. Below are the relevant figures: 

MidAmerican Earnings (in millions) 

U.K. utilities ^^^k. . . T 

Iowa utility ^F. . . . M .^r 

Western utilities 

Pipelines • -^^L 

HomeServices M. „. 

Other (net) 

Operating earnings before corporate interest and taxes 

Interest, other than to Berkshire 

Interest on Berkshire junior debt 

Income tax 


2011 

2010 

$ 469 

$ 333 

279 

279 

771 

783 

388 

378 

39 

42 

36 

47 

1,982 

1,862 

(323) 

(323) 

(13) 

(30) 

(315) 

(271) 

$1,331 

$1,238 

$1,204 

$1,131 


*Includes interest earned by Berkshire (net of related income taxes) of $8 in 201 1 and $19 in 2010. 
BNSF 

(Historical accounting through 2/12/10; purchase accounting subsequently) (in millions) 

207l ~ ~2010 

Revenues $19,548 $16,850 

Operating earnings 5,310 4,495 

Interest (Net) 560 507 

Pre-Tax earnings 4,741 3,988 

Net earnings 2,972 2,459 

In the book value recorded on our balance sheet, BNSF and MidAmerican carry substantial goodwill 
components totaling $20 billion. In each instance, however, Charlie and I believe current intrinsic value is far 
greater than book value. 


11 


Manufacturing, Service and Retailing Operations 


Our activities in this part of Berkshire cover the waterfront. Let's look, though, at a summary balance 
sheet and earnings statement for the entire group. 


Balance Sheet 12/31/11 (in millions) 


Assets 


Cash and equivalents $ 4,241 

Accounts and notes receivable 


Inventory 

Other current assets 

Total current assets 


6,584 

8,975 
631 


Goodwill and other intangibles 

Fixed assets 

Other assets 


20,431 

24,755 
17,866 
3,661 

$66,713 


Liabilities and Equity 

Notes payable $ 1,611 

Other current liabilities 15,124 

Total current liabilities 16,735 


Deferred taxes 

Term debt and other liabilities 

Non-controlling interests 

Berkshire equity 


4,661 
6,214 
2,410 
36,693 

$66,713 


Earnings Statement ( in millions ) 


2011** 2010 2009 


Revenues $72,406 $66,610 $61,665 

Operating expenses (including depreciation of $1,431 in 201 1 , 

$1,362 in 2010 and $1,422 in 2009) ^^^k 67,239 62,225 59,509 

Interest expense 130 111 98 

Pre-tax earnings ^.^b^ 5.037* 4.274* 2.058* 

Income taxes and non-controlling interests 1,998 1,812 945 

Net earnings $ 3,039 $ 2,462 $ 1,113 

*Does not include purchase-accounting adjustments. 
**Includes earnings of Lubrizol from September 16. 


This group of companies sells products ranging from lollipops to jet airplanes. Some of the businesses 
enjoy terrific economics, measured by earnings on unleveraged net tangible assets that run from 25% after-tax to 
more than 100%. Others produce good returns in the area of 12-20%. A few, however, have very poor returns, a 
result of some serious mistakes I made in my job of capital allocation. These errors came about because I misjudged 
either the competitive strength of the business being purchased or the future economics of the industry in which it 
operated. I try to look out ten or twenty years when making an acquisition, but sometimes my eyesight has been 
poor. Charlie's has been better; he voted no more than "present" on several of my errant purchases. 

Berkshire's newer shareholders may be puzzled over our decision to hold on to my mistakes. After all, 
their earnings can never be consequential to Berkshire's valuation, and problem companies require more 
managerial time than winners. Any management consultant or Wall Street advisor would look at our laggards and 
say "dump them." 

That won't happen. For 29 years, we have regularly laid out Berkshire's economic principles in these 
reports (pages 93-98) and Number 1 1 describes our general reluctance to sell poor performers (which, in most 
cases, lag because of industry factors rather than managerial shortcomings). Our approach is far from Darwinian, 
and many of you may disapprove of it. I can understand your position. However, we have made - and continue to 
make - a commitment to the sellers of businesses we buy that we will retain those businesses through thick and 
thin. So far, the dollar cost of that commitment has not been substantial and may well be offset by the goodwill it 
builds among prospective sellers looking for the right permanent home for their treasured business and loyal 
associates. These owners know that what they get with us can't be delivered by others and that our commitments 
will be good for many decades to come. 

12 


Please understand, however, that Charlie and I are neither masochists nor Polly annas. If either of the 
failings we set forth in Rule 1 1 is present - if the business will likely be a cash drain over the longer term, or if labor 
strife is endemic - we will take prompt and decisive action. Such a situation has happened only a couple of times in 
our 47 -year history, and none of the businesses we now own is in straits requiring us to consider disposing of it. 

The steady and substantial comeback in the U.S. economy since mid-2009 is clear from the earnings 
shown at the front of this section. This compilation includes 54 of our companies. But one of these, Marmon, is 
itself the owner of 140 operations in eleven distinct business sectors. In short, when you look at Berkshire, you 
are looking across corporate America. So let's dig a little deeper to gain a greater insight into what has happened 
in the last few years. 

The four housing-related companies in this section (a group that excludes Clayton, which is carried 
under Finance and Financial Products) had aggregate pre-tax earnings of $227 million in 2009, $362 million in 
2010 and $359 million in 201 1. If you subtract these earnings from those in the combined statement, you will see 
that our multiple and diverse non-housing operations earned $1,831 million in 2009, $3,912 million in 2010 and 
$4,678 million in 201 1. About $291 million of the 201 1 earnings came from the Lubrizol acquisition. The profile 
of the remaining 2011 earnings - $4,387 million - illustrates the comeback of much of America from the 
devastation wrought by the 2008 financial panic. Though housing-related businesses remain in the emergency 
room, most other businesses have left the hospital with their health fully restored. 

Almost all of our managers delivered outstanding performances last year, among them those managers 
who run housing-related businesses and were therefore fighting hurricane-force headwinds. Here are a few examples: 

• Vic Mancinelli again set a record at CTB, our agricultural equipment operation. We purchased CTB in 
2002 for $139 million. It has subsequently distributed $180 million to Berkshire, last year earned $124 
million pre-tax and has $109 million in cash. Vic has made a number of bolt-on acquisitions over the 
years, including a meaningful one he signed up after yearend. 

• TTI, our electric components distributor, increased its sales to a record $2.1 billion, up 12.4% from 

2010. Earnings also hit a record, up 127% from 2007, the year in which we purchased the business. In 

2011, TTI performed far better than the large publicly-traded companies in its field. That's no surprise: 
Paul Andrews and his associates have been besting them for years. Charlie and I are delighted that Paul 
negotiated a large bolt-on acquisition early in 2012. We hope more follow. 

• Iscar, our 80%-owned cutting-tools operation, continues to amaze us. Its sales growth and overall 
performance are unique in its industry. Iscar' s managers - Eitan Wertheimer, Jacob Harpaz and Danny 
Goldman - are brilliant strategists and operators. When the economic world was cratering in November 
2008, they stepped up to buy Tungaloy, a leading Japanese cutting-tool manufacturer. Tungaloy 
suffered significant damage when the tsunami hit north of Tokyo last spring. But you wouldn't know 
that now: Tungaloy went on to set a sales record in 2011. I visited the Iwaki plant in November and 
was inspired by the dedication and enthusiasm of Tungaloy' s management, as well as its staff. They are 
a wonderful group and deserve your admiration and thanks. 

• McLane, our huge distribution company that is run by Grady Rosier, added important new customers in 
2011 and set a pre-tax earnings record of $370 million. Since its purchase in 2003 for $1.5 billion, the 
company has had pre-tax earnings of $2.4 billion and also increased its LIFO reserve by $230 million 
because the prices of the retail products it distributes (candy, gum, cigarettes, etc.) have risen. Grady 
runs a logistical machine second to none. You can look for bolt-ons at McLane, particularly in our new 
wine-and-spirits distribution business. 

13 

Jordan Hansell took over at NetJets in April and delivered 201 1 pre-tax earnings of $227 million. That 
is a particularly impressive performance because the sale of new planes was slow during most of the 
year. In December, however, there was an uptick that was more than seasonally normal. How 
permanent it will be is uncertain. 

A few years ago NetJets was my number one worry: Its costs were far out of line with revenues, and 
cash was hemorrhaging. Without Berkshire's support, NetJets would have gone broke. These problems 
are behind us, and Jordan is now delivering steady profits from a well-controlled and smoothly-running 
operation. NetJets is proceeding on a plan to enter China with some first-class partners, a move that 
will widen our business "moat." No other fractional-ownership operator has remotely the size and 
breadth of the NetJets operation, and none ever will. Ne Jets' unrelenting focus on safety and service 
has paid off in the marketplace. 

It's a joy to watch Marmon's progress under Frank Ptak's leadership. In addition to achieving internal 
growth, Frank regularly makes bolt-on acquisitions that, in aggregate, will materially increase Marmon's 
earning power. (He did three, costing about $270 million, in the last few months.) Joint ventures around 
the world are another opportunity for Marmon. At midyear Marmon partnered with the Kundalia family 
in an Indian crane operation that is already delivering substantial profits. This is Marmon's second 
venture with the family, following a successful wire and cable partnership instituted a few years ago. 

Of the eleven major sectors in which Marmon operates, ten delivered gains in earnings last year. You 
can be confident of higher earnings from Marmon in the years ahead. 

"Buy commodities, sell brands" has long been a formula for business success. It has produced 
enormous and sustained profits for Coca-Cola since 1886 and Wrigley since 1891. On a smaller scale, 
we have enjoyed good fortune with this approach at See's Candy since we purchased it 40 years ago. 

Last year See's had record pre-tax earnings of $83 million, bringing its total since we bought it to $1.65 
billion. Contrast that figure with our purchase price of $25 million and our yearend carrying-value (net 
of cash) of less than zero. (Yes, you read that right; capital employed at See's fluctuates seasonally, 
hitting a low after Christmas.) Credit Brad Kinstler for taking the company to new heights since he 
became CEO in 2006. 

Nebraska Furniture Mart (80% owned) set an earnings record in 201 1, netting more than ten times what 
it did in 1983, when we acquired our stake. 

But that's not the big news. More important was NFM's acquisition of a 433-acre tract north of Dallas 
on which we will build what is almost certain to be the highest-volume home-furnishings store in the 
country. Currently, that title is shared by our two stores in Omaha and Kansas City, each of which had 
record-setting sales ol more than $400 million in 2011. It will be several years before the Texas store is 
completed, but I look forward to cutting the ribbon at the opening. (At Berkshire, the managers do the 
work; I take the bows.) 

Our new store, which will offer an unequalled variety of merchandise sold at prices that can't be 
matched, will bring huge crowds from near and far. This drawing power and our extensive holdings of 
land at the site should enable us to attract a number of other major stores. (If any high-volume retailers 
are reading this, contact me.) 

Our experience with NFM and the Blumkin family that runs it has been a real joy. The business was 
built by Rose Blumkin (known to all as "Mrs. B"), who started the company in 1937 with $500 and a 
dream. She sold me our interest when she was 89 and worked until she was 103. (After retiring, she 
died the next year, a sequence I point out to any other Berkshire manager who even thinks of retiring.) 

Mrs. B's son, Louie, now 92, helped his mother build the business after he returned from World War II 
and, along with his wife, Fran, has been my friend for 55 years. In turn, Louie's sons, Ron and Irv, have 
taken the company to new heights, first opening the Kansas City store and now gearing up for Texas. 

14 

The "boys" and I have had many great times together, and I count them among my best friends. The 
Blumkins are a remarkable family. Never inclined to let an extraordinary gene pool go to waste, I am 
rejoicing these days because several members of the fourth Blumkin generation have joined NFM. 

Overall, the intrinsic value of the businesses in this Berkshire sector significantly exceeds their book 
value. For many of the smaller companies, however, this is not true. I have made more than my share of mistakes 
buying small companies. Charlie long ago told me, "If something's not worth doing at all, it's not worth 
doing well," and I should have listened harder. In any event, our large purchases have generally worked 
well - extraordinarily well in a few cases - and overall this sector is a winner for us. 

Certain shareholders have told me they hunger for more discussions of accounting arcana. So here's a 
bit of GAAP-mandated nonsense I hope both of them enjoy. 

Common sense would tell you that our varied subsidiaries should be carried on our books at their cost 
plus the earnings they have retained since our purchase (unless their economic value has materially decreased, in 
which case an appropriate write-down must be taken). And that's essentially the reality at Berkshire - except for 
the weird situation at Marmon. 

We purchased 64% of the company in 2008 and put this interest on our books at our cost, $4.8 billion. 
So far, so good. Then, in early 2011, pursuant to our original contract with the Pritzker family, we purchased an 
additional 16%, paying $1.5 billion as called for by a formula that reflected Marmon's increased value. In this 
instance, however, we were required to immediately write off $614 million of the purchase price retroactive to 
the end of 2010. (Don't ask!) Obviously, this write-off had no connection to economic reality. The excess of 
Marmon's intrinsic value over its carrying value is widened by this meaningless write-down. 

Finance and Financial Products 

This sector, our smallest, includes two rental companies, XTRA (trailers) and CORT (furniture), and 
Clayton Homes, the country's leading producer and financer of manufactured homes. Aside from these 100%-owned 
subsidiaries, we also include in this category a collection of financial assets and our 50% interest in Berkadia 
Commercial Mortgage. 

It's instructive to look at what transpired at our three operating businesses after the economy fell off a 
cliff in late 2008, because their experiences illuminate the fractured recovery that later came along. 

Results at our two leasing companies mirrored the "non-housing" economy. Their combined pre-tax 
earnings were $13 million in 2009, $53 million in 2010 and $155 million in 2011, an improvement reflecting the 
steady recovery we have seen in almost all of our non-housing businesses. In contrast, Clayton's world of 
manufactured housing (just like site-built housing) has endured a veritable depression, experiencing no recovery 
to date. Manufactured housing sales in the nation were 49,789 homes in 2009, 50,046 in 2010 and 51,606 in 
2011. (When housing was booming in 2005, they were 146,744.) 

Despite these difficult times, Clayton has continued to operate profitably, largely because its mortgage 
portfolio has performed well under trying circumstances. Because we are the largest lender in the manufactured 
homes sector and are also normally lending to lower-and-middle-income families, you might expect us to suffer 
heavy losses during a housing meltdown. But by sticking to old-fashioned loan policies - meaningful down 
payments and monthly payments with a sensible relationship to regular income - Clayton has kept losses to 
acceptable levels. It has done so even though many of our borrowers have had negative equity for some time. 

As is well-known, the U.S. went off the rails in its home-ownership and mortgage-lending policies, 
and for these mistakes our economy is now paying a huge price. All of us participated in the destructive 
behavior - government, lenders, borrowers, the media, rating agencies, you name it. At the core of the folly was 
the almost universal belief that the value of houses was certain to increase over time and that any dips 
would be inconsequential. The acceptance of this premise justified almost any price and practice in housing 
transactions. Homeowners everywhere felt richer and rushed to "monetize" the increased value of their homes by 
refinancings. These massive cash infusions fueled a consumption binge throughout our economy. It all seemed 
great fun while it lasted. (A largely unnoted fact: Large numbers of people who have "lost" their house through 
foreclosure have actually realized a profit because they carried out refinancings earlier that gave them cash in 
excess of their cost. In these cases, the evicted homeowner was the winner, and the victim was the lender.) 

15 

In 2007, the bubble burst, just as all bubbles must. We are now in the fourth year of a cure that, though 
long and painful, is sure to succeed. Today, household formations are consistently exceeding housing starts. 

Clayton's earnings should improve materially when the nation's excess housing inventory is worked 
off. As I see things today, however, I believe the intrinsic value of the three businesses in this sector does not 
differ materially from their book value. 

Investments 

Below we show our common stock investments that at yearend had a market value of more than $1 billion. 

12/31/11 

Percentage of 

Shares Company Company Cost* Market 

Owned 

(in millions) 

151,610,700 
American Express Company 
13.0 
$ 1,287 
$ 7,151 
200,000,000 
The Coca-Cola Company 
8.8 
1,299 
13,994 
29,100,937 
ConocoPhillips 
2.3 
2,027 
2,121 
63,905,931 
International Business Machines Corp 
5.5 
10,856 
11,751 
31,416,127 
Johnson & Johnson 
1.2 
1,880 
2,060 
79,034,713 
Kraft Foods Inc 
4.5 
2,589 
2,953 
20,060,390 
Munich Re > 
11.3 
2,990 
2,464 
3,947,555 
POSCO 
5.1 
768 
1,301 
72,391,036 
The Procter & Gamble Company 
2.6 
464 
4,829 
25,848,838 
Sanofi 
1.9 
2,055 
1,900 
291,577,428 
Tpsrn pip A 
3.6 
1,719 
1,827 
78,060,769 
U.S. Bancorp 
4.1 
2,401 
2,112 
39,037,142 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc ^^^-^^ 
1.1 
1,893 
2,333 
400,015,828 
Wells Fargo & Company 
7.6 
9,086 
11,024 
Others 
6,895 
9,171 
Total Common Stocks Carried at Market .... 
$48,209 
$76,991 

*This is our actual purchase price and also our tax basis; GAAP "cost" differs in a few cases because of 
write-ups or write-downs that have been required. 

We made few changes in our investment holdings during 2011. But three moves were important: our 
purchases of IBM and Bank of America and the $1 billion addition we made to our Wells Fargo position. 

The banking industry is back on its feet, and Wells Fargo is prospering. Its earnings are strong, its 
assets solid and its capital at record levels. At Bank of America, some huge mistakes were made by prior 
management. Brian Moynihan has made excellent progress in cleaning these up, though the completion of that 
process will take a number of years. Concurrently, he is nurturing a huge and attractive underlying business that 
will endure long after today's problems are forgotten. Our warrants to buy 700 million Bank of America shares 
will likely be of great value before they expire. 

As was the case with Coca-Cola in 1988 and the railroads in 2006, 1 was late to the IBM party. I have 
been reading the company's annual report for more than 50 years, but it wasn't until a Saturday in March last 
year that my thinking crystallized. As Thoreau said, "It's not what you look at that matters, it's what you see." 

Todd Combs built a $1.75 billion portfolio (at cost) last year, and Ted Weschler will soon create one of 
similar size. Each of them receives 80% of his performance compensation from his own results and 20% from his 
partner's. When our quarterly filings report relatively small holdings, these are not likely to be buys I made 
(though the media often overlook that point) but rather holdings denoting purchases by Todd or Ted. 

16 

One additional point about these two new arrivals. Both Ted and Todd will be helpful to the next CEO 
of Berkshire in making acquisitions. They have excellent "business minds" that grasp the economic forces likely 
to determine the future of a wide variety of businesses. They are aided in their thinking by an understanding of 
what is predictable and what is unknowable. 

There is little new to report on our derivatives positions, which we have described in detail in past reports. 
(Annual reports since 1977 are available at www.berkshirehathaway.com.) One important industry change, 
however, must be noted: Though our existing contracts have very minor collateral requirements, the rules have 
changed for new positions. Consequently, we will not be initiating any major derivatives positions. We shun 
contracts of any type that could require the instant posting of collateral. The possibility of some sudden and huge 
posting requirement - arising from an out-of-the-blue event such as a worldwide financial panic or massive terrorist 
attack - is inconsistent with our primary objectives of redundant liquidity and unquestioned financial strength. 

Our insurance-like derivatives contracts, whereby we pay if various issues included in high-yield bond 
indices default, are coming to a close. The contracts that most exposed us to losses have already expired, and the 
remainder will terminate soon. In 2011, we paid out $86 million on two losses, bringing our total payments to 
$2.6 billion. We are almost certain to realize a final "underwriting profit" on this portfolio because the premiums 
we received were $3.4 billion, and our future losses are apt to be minor. In addition, we will have averaged about 
$2 billion of float over the five-year life of these contracts. This successful result during a time of great credit 
stress underscores the importance of obtaining a premium that is commensurate with the risk. 

Charlie and I continue to believe that our equity-put positions will produce a significant profit, considering 
both the $4.2 billion of float we will have held for more than fifteen years and the $222 million profit we've already 
realized on contracts that we repurchased. At yearend, Berkshire's book value reflected a liability of $8.5 billion for 
the remaining contracts; if they had all come due at that time our payment would have been $6.2 billion. 

The Basic Choices for Investors and the One We Strongly Prefer 

Investing is often described as the process of laying out money now in the expectation of receiving 
more money in the future. At Berkshire we take a more demanding approach, defining investing as the transfer to 
others of purchasing power now with the reasoned expectation of receiving more purchasing power - after taxes 
have been paid on nominal gains - in the future. More succinctly, investing is forgoing consumption now in 
order to have the ability to consume more at a later date. 

From our definition there flows an important corollary: The riskiness of an investment is not measured 
by beta (a Wall Street term encompassing volatility and often used in measuring risk) but rather by the 
probability - the reasoned probability - of that investment causing its owner a loss of purchasing-power over his 
contemplated holding period. Assets can fluctuate greatly in price and not be risky as long as they are reasonably 
certain to deliver increased purchasing power over their holding period. And as we will see, a non-fluctuating 
asset can be laden with risk. 

Investment possibilities are both many and varied. There are three major categories, however, and it's 
important to understand the characteristics of each. So let's survey the field. 

• Investments that are denominated in a given currency include money-market funds, bonds, mortgages, 
bank deposits, and other instruments. Most of these currency-based investments are thought of as "safe." 
In truth they are among the most dangerous of assets. Their beta may be zero, but their risk is huge. 

Over the past century these instruments have destroyed the purchasing power of investors in many 
countries, even as the holders continued to receive timely payments of interest and principal. This ugly 
result, moreover, will forever recur. Governments determine the ultimate value of money, and systemic 
forces will sometimes cause them to gravitate to policies that produce inflation. From time to time such 
policies spin out of control. 

Even in the U.S., where the wish for a stable currency is strong, the dollar has fallen a staggering 86% 
in value since 1965, when I took over management of Berkshire. It takes no less than $7 today to buy 
what $1 did at that time. Consequently, a tax-free institution would have needed 4.3% interest annually 
from bond investments over that period to simply maintain its purchasing power. Its managers would 
have been kidding themselves if they thought of any portion of that interest as "income." 

17 

For tax-paying investors like you and me, the picture has been far worse. During the same 47-year 
period, continuous rolling of U.S. Treasury bills produced 5.7% annually. That sounds satisfactory. But 
if an individual investor paid personal income taxes at a rate averaging 25%, this 5.7% return would 
have yielded nothing in the way of real income. This investor's visible income tax would have stripped 
him of 1.4 points of the stated yield, and the invisible inflation tax would have devoured the remaining 
4.3 points. It's noteworthy that the implicit inflation "tax" was more than triple the explicit income tax 
that our investor probably thought of as his main burden. "In God We Trust" may be imprinted on our 
currency, but the hand that activates our government's printing press has been all too human. 

High interest rates, of course, can compensate purchasers for the inflation risk they face with currency-based 
investments - and indeed, rates in the early 1980s did that job nicely. Current rates, however, do not come 
close to offsetting the purchasing-power risk that investors assume. Right now bonds should come with a 
warning label. 

Under today's conditions, therefore, I do not like currency-based investments. Even so, Berkshire holds 
significant amounts of them, primarily of the short-term variety. At Berkshire the need for ample 
liquidity occupies center stage and will never be slighted, however inadequate rates may be. 
Accommodating this need, we primarily hold U.S. Treasury bills, the only investment that can be 
counted on for liquidity under the most chaotic of economic conditions. Our working level for liquidity 
is $20 billion; $10 billion is our absolute minimum. 

Beyond the requirements that liquidity and regulators impose on us, we will purchase currency-related 
securities only if they offer the possibility of unusual gain - either because a particular credit is 
mispriced, as can occur in periodic junk-bond debacles, or because rates rise to a level that offers the 
possibility of realizing substantial capital gains on high-grade bonds when rates fall. Though we've 
exploited both opportunities in the past - and may do so again - we are now 1 80 degrees removed from 
such prospects. Today, a wry comment that Wall Streeter Shelby Cullom Davis made long ago seems 
apt: "Bonds promoted as offering risk-free returns are now priced to deliver return-free risk." 

The second major category of investments involves assets that will never produce anything, but that are 
purchased in the buyer's hope that someone else - who also knows that the assets will be forever 
unproductive - will pay more for them in the future. Tulips, of all things, briefly became a favorite of 
such buyers in the 17 th century. 

This type of investment requires an expanding pool of buyers, who, in turn, are enticed because they 
believe the buying pool will expand still further. Owners are not inspired by what the asset itself can 
produce - it will remain lifeless forever - but rather by the belief that others will desire it even more 
avidly in the future. 

The major asset in this category is gold, currently a huge favorite of investors who fear almost all other 
assets, especially paper money (of whose value, as noted, they are right to be fearful). Gold, however, 
has two significant shortcomings, being neither of much use nor procreative. True, gold has some 
industrial and decorative utility, but the demand for these purposes is both limited and incapable of 
soaking up new production. Meanwhile, if you own one ounce of gold for an eternity, you will still 
own one ounce at its end. 

What motivates most gold purchasers is their belief that the ranks of the fearful will grow. During the 
past decade that belief has proved correct. Beyond that, the rising price has on its own generated 
additional buying enthusiasm, attracting purchasers who see the rise as validating an investment thesis. 
As "bandwagon" investors join any party, they create their own truth - for a while. 

Over the past 15 years, both Internet stocks and houses have demonstrated the extraordinary excesses 
that can be created by combining an initially sensible thesis with well-publicized rising prices. In these 
bubbles, an army of originally skeptical investors succumbed to the "proof delivered by the market, 
and the pool of buyers - for a time - expanded sufficiently to keep the bandwagon rolling. But bubbles 
blown large enough inevitably pop. And then the old proverb is confirmed once again: "What the wise 
man does in the beginning, the fool does in the end." 

18 

Today the world's gold stock is about 170,000 metric tons. If all of this gold were melded together, it 
would form a cube of about 68 feet per side. (Picture it fitting comfortably within a baseball infield.) At 
$1,750 per ounce - gold's price as I write this - its value would be $9.6 trillion. Call this cube pile A. 

Let's now create a pile B costing an equal amount. For that, we could buy all U.S. cropland (400 
million acres with output of about $200 billion annually), plus 16 Exxon Mobils (the world's most 
profitable company, one earning more than $40 billion annually). After these purchases, we would 
have about $1 trillion left over for walking-around money (no sense feeling strapped after this buying 
binge). Can you imagine an investor with $9.6 trillion selecting pile A over pile B? 

Beyond the staggering valuation given the existing stock of gold, current prices make today's annual 
production of gold command about $160 billion. Buyers - whether jewelry and industrial users, 
frightened individuals, or speculators - must continually absorb this additional supply to merely 
maintain an equilibrium at present prices. 

A century from now the 400 million acres of farmland will have produced staggering amounts of corn, 
wheat, cotton, and other crops - and will continue to produce that valuable bounty, whatever the 
currency may be. Exxon Mobil will probably have delivered trillions of dollars in dividends to its 
owners and will also hold assets worth many more trillions (and, remember, you get 16 Exxons). The 
170,000 tons of gold will be unchanged in size and still incapable of producing anything. You can 
fondle the cube, but it will not respond. 

Admittedly, when people a century from now are fearful, it's likely many will still rush to gold. I'm 
confident, however, that the $9.6 trillion current valuation of pile A will compound over the century at 
a rate far inferior to that achieved by pile B. 

Our first two categories enjoy maximum popularity at peaks of fear: Terror over economic collapse 
drives individuals to currency-based assets, most particularly U.S. obligations, and fear of currency 
collapse fosters movement to sterile assets such as gold. We heard "cash is king" in late 2008, just 
when cash should have been deployed rather than held. Similarly, we heard "cash is trash" in the early 
1980s just when fixed-dollar investments were at their most attractive level in memory. On those 
occasions, investors who required a supportive crowd paid dearly for that comfort. 

My own preference - and you knew this was coming - is our third category: investment in productive 
assets, whether businesses, farms, or real estate. Ideally, these assets should have the ability in 
inflationary times to deliver output that will retain its purchasing-power value while requiring a 
minimum of new capital investment. Farms, real estate, and many businesses such as Coca-Cola, IBM 
and our own See's Candy meet that double-barreled test. Certain other companies - think of our 
regulated utilities, for example - fail it because inflation places heavy capital requirements on them. To 
earn more, their owners must invest more. Even so, these investments will remain superior to 
nonproductive or currency-based assets. 

Whether the currency a century from now is based on gold, seashells, shark teeth, or a piece of paper 
(as today), people will be willing to exchange a couple of minutes of their daily labor for a Coca-Cola 
or some See's peanut brittle. In the future the U.S. population will move more goods, consume more 
food, and require more living space than it does now. People will forever exchange what they produce 
for what others produce. 

Our country's businesses will continue to efficiently deliver goods and services wanted by our citizens. 
Metaphorically, these commercial "cows" will live for centuries and give ever greater quantities of "milk" 
to boot. Their value will be determined not by the medium of exchange but rather by their capacity to 
deliver milk. Proceeds from the sale of the milk will compound for the owners of the cows, just as they 
did during the 20 th century when the Dow increased from 66 to 11 ,497 (and paid loads of dividends as 
well). Berkshire's goal will be to increase its ownership of first-class businesses. Our first choice will be 
to own them in their entirety - but we will also be owners by way of holding sizable amounts of 
marketable stocks. I believe that over any extended period of time this category of investing will prove to 
be the runaway winner among the three we've examined. More important, it will be by far the safest. 

19 

The Annual Meeting 

The annual meeting will be held on Saturday, May 5 th at the CenturyLink Center (renamed from 
"Qwest"). Last year, Carrie Kizer debuted as the ringmaster and earned a lifetime assignment. Everyone loved 
the job she did - especially me. 

Soon after the 7 a.m. opening of the doors, we will have a new activity: The Newspaper Tossing Challenge. 
Late last year, Berkshire purchased the Omaha World-Herald and, in my meeting with its shareholder-employees, 
I told of the folding and throwing skills I developed while delivering 500,000 papers as a teenager. 

I immediately saw skepticism in the eyes of the audience. That was no surprise to me. After all, the 
reporters' mantra is: "If your mother says she loves you, check it out." So now I have to back up my claim. At 
the meeting, I will take on all comers in making 35-foot tosses of the World-Herald to a Clayton porch. Any 
challenger whose paper lands closer to the doorstep than mine will receive a dilly bar. I've asked Dairy Queen to 
supply several for the contest, though I doubt that any will be needed. We will have a large stack of papers. Grab 
one. Fold it (no rubber bands). Take your best shot. Make my day. 

At 8:30, a new Berkshire movie will be shown. An hour later, we will start the question-and-answer 
period, which (with a break for lunch at the CenturyLink' s stands) will last until 3:30. After a short recess, 
Charlie and I will convene the annual meeting at 3:45. If you decide to leave during the day's question periods, 
please do so while Charlie is talking. 

The best reason to exit, of course, is to shop. We will help you do so by filling the 194,300-square-foot 
hall that adjoins the meeting area with products from dozens of Berkshire subsidiaries. Last year, you did your 
part, and most locations racked up record sales. In a nine-hour period, we sold 1,249 pairs of Justin boots, 11,254 
pounds of See's candy, 8,000 Quikut knives (that's 15 knives per minute) and 6,126 pairs of Wells Lamont 
gloves, a Marmon product whose very existence was news to me. (The product I focus on is money.) But you can 
do better. Remember: Anyone who says money can't buy happiness simply hasn't shopped at our meeting. 

Among the new exhibitors this year will be Brooks, our running-shoe company. Brooks has been 
gobbling up market share and in 201 1 had a sales gain of 34%, its tenth consecutive year of record volume. Drop 
by and congratulate Jim Weber, the company's CEO. And be sure to buy a couple of pairs of limited edition 
"Berkshire Hathaway Running Shoes." 

GEICO will have a booth staffed by a number of its top counselors from around the country, all of 
them ready to supply you with auto insurance quotes. In most cases, GEICO will be able to give you a 
shareholder discount (usually 8%). This special offer is permitted by 44 of the 51 jurisdictions in which we 
operate. (One supplemental point: The discount is not additive if you qualify for another, such as that given 
certain groups.) Bring the details of your existing insurance and check out whether we can save you money. For 
at least half of you, I believe we can. 

Be sure to visit the Bookworm. It will carry more than 35 books and DVDs, including a couple of new 
ones. I recommend MiTek, an informative history of one of our very successful subsidiaries. You'll learn how my 
interest in the company was originally piqued by my receiving in the mail a hunk of ugly metal whose purpose I 
couldn't fathom. Since we bought MiTek in 2001, it has made 33 "tuck-in" acquisitions, almost all successful. I 
think you'll also like a short book that Peter Bevelin has put together explaining Berkshire's investment and 
operating principles. It sums up what Charlie and I have been saying over the years in annual reports and at 
annual meetings. Should you need to ship your book purchases, a shipping service will be available nearby. 

If you are a big spender - or aspire to become one - visit Elliott Aviation on the east side of the Omaha 
airport between noon and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. There we will have a fleet of NetJets aircraft that will get your 
pulse racing. Come by bus; leave by private jet. I'll OK your credit. 

An attachment to the proxy material that is enclosed with this report explains how you can obtain the 
credential you will need for admission to the meeting and other events. Airlines have sometimes jacked up prices 
for the Berkshire weekend. If you are coming from far away, compare the cost of flying to Kansas City versus 
Omaha. The drive between the two cities is about 2 V% hours, and it may be that you can save significant money, 
particularly if you had planned to rent a car in Omaha. Spend the savings with us. 

20 

At Nebraska Furniture Mart, located on a 77-acre site on 72 nd Street between Dodge and Pacific, we 
will again be having "Berkshire Weekend" discount pricing. Last year the store did $32.7 million of business 
during its annual meeting sale, a volume that exceeds the yearly sales of most furniture stores. To obtain the 
Berkshire discount, you must make your purchases between Tuesday, May 1 st and Monday, May 7 th inclusive, 
and also present your meeting credential. The period's special pricing will even apply to the products of several 
prestigious manufacturers that normally have ironclad rules against discounting but which, in the spirit of 
our shareholder weekend, have made an exception for you. We appreciate their cooperation. NFM is open 
from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday. On Saturday this year, from 5 :30 p.m. 
to 8 p.m., NFM is having a picnic to which you are all invited. 

At Borsheims, we will again have two shareholder-only events. The first will be a cocktail reception 
from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. on Friday, May 4 th . The second, the main gala, will be held on Sunday, May 6 th , from 
9 a.m. to 4 p.m. On Saturday, we will be open until 6 p.m. On Sunday, around 2 p.m., I will be clerking at 
Borsheims, desperate to beat my sales figure from last year. So come take advantage of me. Ask me for my 
"Crazy Warren" price. 

We will have huge crowds at Borsheims throughout the weekend. For your convenience, therefore, 
shareholder prices will be available from Monday, April 30 th through Saturday, May 12 th . During that period, 
please identify yourself as a shareholder by presenting your meeting credentials or a brokerage statement that 
shows you are a Berkshire holder. 

On Sunday, in the mall outside of Borsheims, a blindfolded Patrick Wolff, twice U.S. chess champion, 
will take on all comers - who will have their eyes wide open - in groups of six. Nearby, Norman Beck, a 
remarkable magician from Dallas, will bewilder onlookers. Additionally, we will have Bob Hamman and Sharon 
Osberg, two of the world's top bridge experts, available to play bridge with our shareholders on Sunday 
afternoon. Two non-experts - Charlie and I - will also be at the tables. 

Gorat's and Piccolo's will again be open exclusively for Berkshire shareholders on Sunday, May 6 th . 
Both will be serving until 10 p.m., with Gorat's opening at 1 p.m. and Piccolo's opening at 4 p.m. These 
restaurants are my favorites, and I will eat at both of them on Sunday evening. (Actuarial tables tell me that I can 
consume another 12 million calories before my death. I'm terrified at the thought of leaving any of these behind, 
so will be frontloading on Sunday.) Remember: To make a reservation at Gorat's, call 402-551-3733 on April 1 st 
(but not before) and at Piccolo's, call 402-342-9038. At Piccolo's, show some class and order a giant root beer 
float for dessert. Only sissies get the small one. 

We will again have the same three financial journalists lead the question-and-answer period at the 
meeting, asking Charlie and me questions that shareholders have submitted to them by e-mail. The journalists 
and their e-mail addresses are: Carol Loomis, of Fortune, who may be e-mailed at cloomis@fortunemail.com; 
Becky Quick, of CNBC, at BerkshireQuestions@cnbc.com, and Andrew Ross Sorkin, of The New York Times, 
at arsorkin@nytimes.com. 

From the questions submitted, each journalist will choose the dozen or so he or she decides are the 
most interesting and important. The journalists have told me your question has the best chance of being selected 
if you keep it concise, avoid sending it in at the last moment, make it Berkshire-related and include no more than 
two questions in any e-mail you send them. (In your e-mail, let the journalist know if you would like your name 
mentioned if your question is selected.) 

This year we are adding a second panel of three financial analysts who follow Berkshire. They are Cliff 
Gallant of KBW, Jay Gelb of Barclays Capital and Gary Ransom of Dowling and Partners. These analysts will 
bring their own Berkshire- specific questions and alternate with the journalists and the audience. 

Charlie and I believe that all shareholders should have access to new Berkshire information simultaneously 
and should also have adequate time to analyze it, which is why we try to issue financial information after the market 
close on a Friday. We do not talk one-on-one to large institutional investors or analysts. Our new panel will let 
analysts ask questions - perhaps even a few technical ones - in a manner that may be helpful to many shareholders. 

21 

Neither Charlie nor I will get so much as a clue about the questions to be asked. We know the 
journalists and analysts will come up with some tough ones, and that's the way we like it. All told, we expect at 
least 54 questions, which will allow for six from each analyst and journalist and 18 from the audience. If there is 
some extra time, we will take more from the audience. Audience questioners will be determined by drawings that 
will take place at 8:15 a.m. at each of the 13 microphones located in the arena and main overflow room. 

For good reason, I regularly extol the accomplishments of our operating managers. They are truly 
All-Stars, who run their businesses as if they were the only asset owned by their families. I believe their mindset 
to be as shareholder-oriented as can be found in the universe of large publicly-owned companies. Most have no 
financial need to work; the joy of hitting business "home runs" means as much to them as their paycheck. 

Equally important, however, are the 23 men and women who work with me at our corporate office (all 
on one floor, which is the way we intend to keep it!). 

This group efficiently deals with a multitude of SEC and other regulatory requirements and files a 
17,839-page Federal income tax return - hello, Guinness! - as well as state and foreign returns. Additionally, 
they respond to countless shareholder and media inquiries, get out the annual report, prepare for the country's 
largest annual meeting, coordinate the Board's activities - and the list goes on and on. 

They handle all of these business tasks cheerfully and with unbelievable efficiency, making my life easy 
and pleasant. Their efforts go beyond activities strictly related to Berkshire: They deal with 48 universities (selected 
from 200 applicants) who will send students to Omaha this school year for a day with me and also handle all kinds 
of requests that I receive, arrange my travel, and even get me hamburgers for lunch. No CEO has it better. 

This home office crew, along with our operating managers, has my deepest thanks and deserves yours 
as well. Come to Omaha - the cradle of capitalism - on May 5 th and tell them so. 

February 25, 2012 Warren E. Buffett 

Chairman of the Board 

1 

22 
